A Combined Analysis of the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator: Implications for Structure and Disease Models Jian-Min Chen, Chris Cutler, Caroline Jacques, Gilles Buf, Erick Denamur, Guillaume Lecointre, Bernard Mercier, Gordon Cramb and Claude Ferec
Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale EMI 01 15, Etablissement Francais du Sang to Bretagne, Universite de Bretagne Occidentale, and Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Brest, France; School of Biology, University of Saint Andrews, Saint Andrews, Fife, Scotland; Laboratoire de Biochimie-Biologie Moleculaire, CHU Angers, Angers, France; Observatoire Oceanologique, Universite Pierre et Marie Curie/Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Banyuls-sur-Mer, France; Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U458, Hopital Robert Debre, Paris, France; Service de Systematique Moleculaire, Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France
   Abstract TOP Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results and Discussion Conclusions Acknowledgements References   Over the past decade, nearly 1,000 variants have been identified in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene in classic and atypical cystic fibrosis (CF) patients worldwide, and an enormous wealth of information concerning the structure and function of the protein has also been accumulated. These data, if evaluated together in a sequence comparison of all currently available CFTR homologs, are likely to refine the global structure-function relationship of the protein, which will, in turn, facilitate interpretation of the identified mutations in the gene. Based on such a combined analysis, we had recently defined a "functional R domain" of the CFTR protein. First, presenting two full-length cDNA sequences (termed sCFTR-I and sCFTR-II) from the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and an additional partial coding sequence from the eastern gray kangaroo (Macropus giganteus), this study went further to refine the boundaries of the two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) and the COOH-terminal tail (C-tail), wherein NBD1 was defined as going from P439 to G646, NBD2 as going from A1225 to E1417, and the C-tail as going from E1418 to L1480. This approach also provided further insights into the differential roles of the two halves of CFTR and highlighted several well-conserved motifs that may be involved in inter- or intramolecular interactions. Moreover, a serious concern that a certain fraction of missense mutations identified in the CFTR gene may not have functional consequences was raised. Finally, phylogenetic analysis of all the full-length CFTR amino acid sequences and an extended set of exon 13 to coding nucleotide sequences reinforced the idea that the rabbit may represent a better CF model than the mouse and strengthened the assertion that a long-branch attraction artifact separates the murine rodents from the rabbit and the guinea pig, the other Glires.
   Introduction TOP Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results and Discussion Conclusions Acknowledgements References   Cystic fibrosis (CF; online Mendelian inheritance in man [OMIM] 219700), the most common lethal autosomal recessive disease in the Caucasian population, is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR; OMIM 602421) gene (Kerem et al. 1989 ; Riordan et al. 1989 ; Rommens et al. 1989 ). The encoded 1,480-amino-acid protein functions mainly as a chloride selective ion channel and is composed of two structurally homologous halves, with each half consisting of a membrane-spanning domain (MSD) and a nucleotide-binding domain (NBD); the two halves are linked by a unique regulatory or R domain. The MSDs contribute to the formation of the chloride selective pore, the NBDs bind and hydrolyze ATP to regulate channel gating, and R domain phosphorylation controls channel activity (for reviews, see Gadsby and Nairn 1999 ; Sheppard and Welsh 1999 ). In addition, there is increasing evidence that CFTR can affect the transport of other ions, including HCO-3 (Choi et al. 2001 and references therein).
The cloning of CFTR (Riordan et al. 1989 ) has promoted extensive research activities in two interrelated aspects: first, identification of CFTR mutations in classic and atypical CF patients, and second, elucidation of the functional role of CFTR in both the normal and the diseased states during the past decade. However, while screening for CFTR mutations has become a purely molecular pursuit (currently, nearly 1,000 DNA variants of the gene are deposited in the CF Mutation Data Base: http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr), the principal challenge is interpretation of these events in terms of their likely medical consequences. This is especially the case with the vast number of missense mutations (40%), most of which are rare or even "private." The formidable nature of this situation lies in the large size and complexity of the gene and, more importantly, in the complex multidomain structure of the protein.
Although functional analysis, which unfortunately is still not routinely available, will continue to be used to bridge this gap, it can be complemented with other strategies. In this regard, the impact of comparative sequence analysis has been tremendous. Even the originally proposed CFTR structure, which has proved to be remarkably prescient, was largely based on a comparison of human CFTR with a number of other ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family members (Riordan et al. 1989 ). Furthermore, cross-species sequence comparisons between the small number of CFTR homologs available in the early 1990s highlighted that identified mutations had occurred in evolutionary conserved residues (Diamond et al. 1991 ; Tucker, Tannahill, and Higgins 1992 ). These early but necessarily limited analyses clearly demonstrated the importance of evolutionary information in interpreting the effects of mutations and have also frequently been taken into account in the design of functional studies. Therefore, such a large number of missense mutations identified in the human CFTR and the abundance of structural and functional analysis data accumulated over the past decade, if evaluated together in the context of a sequence comparison of all of the currently available CFTR orthologs, will allow a significantly improved refinement of the domain structure of CFTR. This will, in turn, facilitate interpretation of the identified mutations. The central thesis of this work represents such an attempt, and, towards that end, the already large number of CFTR orthologs has been expanded by the determination of the sequences of two full-length CFTR orthologous isoforms from a single teleost fish species, the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar).
The availability of this newly expanded number of CFTR sequences also offered an opportunity to reevaluate the use of mouse models for CF studies and, from a phylogenetic point of view, to check whether the paraphyly of the Glires (Lagomorpha and Rodentia), determined using CFTR sequences, was reliable or simply the result of a long-branch attraction artifact between the long rodent branch and the very divergent outgroup (Xenopus) (Vuillaumier et al. 1997 ). In this regard, a partial coding sequence from the eastern gray kangaroo (Macropus giganteus; a marsupial mammal whose divergence time with placental mammals is about 120 Myr) was also produced in order to determine whether such an outgroup long-branch attraction artifact existed.
   Materials and Methods TOP Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results and Discussion Conclusions Acknowledgements References   Cloning of Atlantic Salmon (S. salar) CFTR cDNAs Gill tissues from Atlantic salmon, which had been adapted to seawater for at least 2 weeks, were used for mRNA preparation. First-strand cDNA was subsequently synthesized using Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Clontech, Palo Alto, Calif.) and random oligonucleotides.
Three steps were taken to isolate the salmon CFTR cDNAs by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). First, three pairs of inosine (I) to containing degenerate oligonucleotide primers (sense 5'-TT(T/C) GG(I/C) (C/T)T(I/C) CA(I/C) C(A/G)(C/T) (A/C)T(I/C) GG(I/C) ATG CA(A/G) ATG (A/C)G-3', antisense 5'-(A/G)TC (I/C)A(A/G) (I/C)A(A/G) (A/G)TA (I/C)A(A/G) (A/G)TC (I/C)GC (A/G)TC (C/T) TT (A/G)TA-3'; sense 5'-GC(I/C) (I/C)T(I/C) TA(T/C) AA(A/G) GA(T/C) GC(I/C) GA(T/C) (C/T)T(I/C) TA(T/C) (C/T)T-3', antisense 5'-TGG TTC CT(C/T) TTC CGC (A/T)(G/T)(C/T) GAC ATI (A/C)TC TT 3'; and sense 5' TA(T/C) TT(T/C) GA(A/G) AC(I/C) (T/C)T(I/C) TT(T/C) CA(T/C) AA(A/G) GC-3', antisense 5'-A(A/G)(A/G) CAC AT(I/C) A(A/G)(T/C) TG(T/C) TT(A/G) TG(I/C) CC(A/G) T-3') which targeted highly conserved regions of the CFTR gene based on published CFTR sequences were synthesized and used to generate candidate PCR fragments. Second, when a specific CFTR fragment was obtained, new specific primers were designed and further PCR fragments were amplified. These efforts generated two sets of three overlapping clones covering most of the salmon CFTR-coding sequence. Finally, the remaining translated and the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of the two cDNAs were obtained using a 5'/3' Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends (RACE) Kit (Boehringer Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany) or a similar Marathon cDNA cloning kit (Clontech) utilizing isoform-specific primers.
Cloning of CFTR Exon 13 to Coding Sequence from the Eastern Gray Kangaroo (M. giganteus) To determine the possible presence of a long-branch attraction artifact between the long rodent branch and the very divergent outgroup (Xenopus) (Vuillaumier et al. 1997 ), and also to maximize the refinement of the boundaries between NBD1 and the R domain, the cloning of the coding sequence of exon 13 (the largest exon in the CFTR gene) from the eastern gray kangaroo was undertaken. A pair of degenerate oligonucleotide primers, sense 5'-TGT IT(C/T) TG(C/T) AAA (C/T)T(G/A) ATG G(C/T)I A(A/G)C AAA AC-3' and antisense 5'-C(T/C)T (T/C)A(G/A) (A/G)TC (T/C)TC TTC (A/G)TT (A/T)AT ITC TTC-3', which targeted the highly conserved sequences between the published CFTR homologs at each end of exon 13, respectively, were synthesized. Genomic DNA was used for PCR amplification.
DNA Sequencing PCR products were purified by Centricon-100 (Millipore, Bedford, Mass.) and cloned into the pGEM-T vector (Promega, Madison, Wis.). Double-stranded DNA was sequenced using a combination of specific primers and the vector-specific T7/SP6 primers from both strands using the ABI PRISM BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.) on an ABI 310 sequencer.
Multiple-Sequence Alignments Full-length CFTR sequences were collated from GenBank or SwissProt. In order to refine the boundaries of NBD1, several partial sequences were also collated. Multiple-sequence alignments were first performed with CLUSTAL W (http://www2.ebi.ac.uk). Then, the alignment was corrected by eye using MUST (Philippe 1993 ) in order to take into account similarities in chemical properties of amino acid side chains.
Missense Mutations and Single-Amino-Acid-Deletion Mutations All of the missense mutations and single-amino-acid deletions are from the CF Mutation Data Base (http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr).
Phylogenetic Analysis Two CFTR sequence data sets were utilized for phylogenetic analysis. One used 17 exon 13 to coding nucleotide sequences that provided 543 positions, of which 343 were informative for parsimony. The other contained 16 full-length CFTR amino acid sequences, with 1,544 positions, among which 771 were informative for parsimony. Phylogenetic analysis was performed principally using the branch-and-bound search of PAUP (Swofford 1999 ). To check the impact of a suspected artifact on the tree reconstruction method, trees were also reconstructed using uncorrected distances and corrected distances (Kimura 1983 ) through the neighbor-joining approach (Saitou and Nei 1987 ) using the MUST package (Philippe 1993 ). Moreover, absolute mutational saturation was tested by plotting pairwise observed differences against pairwise inferred substitutions in the most parsimonious tree using PAUP and MUST. No saturation was detected, either from the nucleotide or from the amino acid data set. For statistical robustness of nodes, 1,000 bootstrap replicates were generated, and Bremer (1994) supports were calculated using PAUP.
   Results and Discussion TOP Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results and Discussion Conclusions Acknowledgements References   Isolation and Characterization of Two Distinct cDNAs Encoding the Salmon CFTR The Atlantic salmon was of interest for two reasons. First, salmon are capable of adapting rapidly from freshwater to seawater (Buf 1993 ), and we presumed this unique phenomenon of osmoregulation to be associated with the expression of a CFTR homolog. Second, salmon were more distantly related to humans than most of the then-already-analyzed organisms, including mice (Tata et al. 1991 ; Yorifuji et al. 1991 ), cows (Diamond et al. 1991 ), dogfish (Marshall et al. 1991 ), rats (Fiedler, Nemecz, and Shull 1992 ), frogs (Tucker, Tannahill, and Higgins 1992 ; Price et al. 1996 ), and sheep (Tebbutt et al. 1995 ).
Candidate PCR fragments were generated from salmon gill tissue using degenerate oligonucleotide primers. After many rounds of cloning, sequencing, and sequence aligning (which was particularly complicated by the unexpected presence of two highly homologous but clearly different sequences), two CFTR transcripts were finally obtained. Sequence accuracy of the two transcripts was ensured by isoform-specific PCR amplifications using cDNA samples prepared from individual salmon. The general properties of the two transcripts, which were designated sCFTR-I (GenBank accession number AF155237) and sCFTR-II (GenBank accession number AF161070), respectively, are summarized in table 1 . Although there is no guarantee that the 5' UTR of each sequence is complete, the 3' UTR of each sequence is considered complete due to the presence of a polyA addition signal sequence 16 bp (for sCFTR-I) or 12 bp (for sCFTR-II) upstream of the polyA tail.
View this table:    Table 1 Comparison of sCFTR-I and sCFTR-II Transcripts
  The possibility that the sCFTR-I and sCFTR-II genes represented two unique isoforms, rather than allelic variants, was first indicated by the sequences themselves. At the nucleotide level, while sCFTR-I and sCFTR-II share a level of sequence identity as high as 93.2% in the coding region, they have a significantly lower homology in the 5' and 3' UTRs. The 110-bp nucleotides immediately upstream of the translation start site are only 64.0% identical and the 3' UTR is 71.8% identical. At the amino acid level, a significantly lower sequence identity is observed in the R domain (85.2%) as opposed to MSD1 (96.7%), MSD2 (97.7%), NBD1 (99.3%), and NBD2 (97.0%) (domain structure in accordance with Riordan et al. [1989 ]). This is given wide support by recent in vivo expression data: although both sCFTR-I expression and sCFTR-II expression have been shown to increase in the gill following abrupt seawater exposure, the pattern of temporal expression for each gene is considerably different (Singer et al. 2000) . Moreover, the existence of two different genes encoding the same product is not entirely surprising, as many fish species, including salmonids (Hordvik 1998 ), have undergone tetraploidization events during their evolutionary histories, and duplication of certain hormone genes (e.g., Takeo and Yamashita 1999 ) or ion and water transporter genes (Cutler et al. 2000 ; unpublished data) in certain fishes has been reported. Furthermore, there is also circumstantial evidence suggesting the presence of two CFTR genes in another teleost fish, the killifish: two transcripts and two polypeptides were detected in the gill by Northern blotting (Singer et al. 1998 ) and Western blotting (Mickle and Cutting 2000) , respectively. These observations, taken together, strongly suggest that sCFTR-I and sCFTR-II represent different isoforms and that the presence of duplicate CFTR isoforms may be a more general phenomenon in teleost fish species. Although phylogenetic analysis indicates that their duplication occurred after the general radiation of teleost fish species (200 to 400 MYA, which may have been associated with a whole-genome duplication event; Meyer and Malaga-Trillo 1999 ) and even the salmonid-acanthomorph divergence (middle Cretaceous, about 100 MYA; Lecointre 1994 ) (fig. 1 ).
View larger version (15K):    Fig. 1. The most parsimonious tree based on the full-length cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) amino acid sequences using the branch-and-bound search of PAUP* 4.0b4a (Swofford 1999 ). The sequence length utilized 1,544 positions, of which 971 were variable and 771 were informative for parsimony. The tree length is 2,270, with a consistency index of 0.841 and a retention index of 0.868. Branch lengths are given using ACCTRAN optimization. The numbers above the nodes are bootstrap proportions obtained from 1,000 replicates. Bremer (1994) indices are all  > 5 except for the rhesus monkey + macaque clade, whose Bremer index was 1. The same tree was recovered from the neighbor-joining method (Saitou and Nei 1987 ) using corrected distances (Kimura 1983 ). See table 2 for the CFTR sequences except the eel (Anguilla anguilla) sequence (unpublished data), and refer to figure 2 for the sequence alignment (EMBL accession number ALIGN_000076)
  During the cloning process, additional full-length CFTR sequences from several species, including killifish (Singer et al. 1998 ) and puffer fish (Davidson et al. 2000) , were also reported (summarized in table 2 ). As indicated in figure 1 , sCFTR-I and sCFTR-II, along with the killifish and puffer fish sequences, are the most divergent CFTR homologs so far discovered. The availability of this large number of CFTR homologs, which cover a wide range of vertebrate species representing evolutionary divergence of up to 420 Myr, has allowed important, broad cross-species sequence comparisons to be performed.
View this table:    Table 2 CFTR Sequences Used for Analysis
  Implications of a Combined Analysis for the Global Structure-Function Relationship of CFTR Alignment of 15 full-length CFTR amino acid sequences is presented in figure 2 , where all of the current available missense mutations and single-amino-acid deletions are positioned along the aligned sequences. To refine the boundaries of the NBD1, the new isolated partial exon 13 to coding sequence from the eastern gray kangaroo (GenBank accession number AF293978) and several other partial sequences were also aligned. A global survey of figure 2 further highlights that the two NBDs are well conserved and that the most divergent region is the R domain. There is also a general correlation between the level of sequence homology and the number of mutations identified throughout the entire CFTR. Moreover, all of the 11 most common missense mutations or single-amino-acid deletions (i.e., F508del, G551D, N1303K, R117H, R347P, I507del, G85E, R560T, A455E, R334W, and S549N) identified in classic and atypical CF patients worldwide (http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr) occur in stringently conserved residues across the 15 CFTR sequences. These observations strongly suggest that a combined analysis of the current available data in conjunction with a comprehensive sequence comparison of CFTR homologs is highly desirable. Indeed, based on such an approach, a "functional R domain" has recently been defined (Chen, Scotet, and Ferec 2000 ; see also fig. 2). Importantly, this definition not only agrees well with that derived from a concurrent functional approach (Csanady et al. 2000) , but also appears to concur with the regulatory role of this unique domain (Baldursson, Berger, and Welsh 2000) . Here, we extend the study to refine the boundaries of the two NBDs and the COOH-terminal tail (C-tail) and to provide insights about the global structure-function relationship of the CFTR by exploiting the same approach.
View larger version (134K):    Fig. 2. A broad alignment of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) amino acid sequences. Dashes indicate gaps that were introduced to maximize alignment. Identical residues between all the species are in bold letters. The 12 membrane-spanning regions (TM1TM12) are sequentially underlined. In particular, NBD1 and NBD2 are indicated by dotted lines, and the R domain and the C-tail are represented by continuous lines, wherein the upper lines correspond to the original definitions (Riordan et al. 1989 ) and the lower ones correspond to the new definitions. All of the currently identified missense mutations and single-amino-acid deletions (http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr) are positioned in the sequence accordingly. See table 2 for the CFTR sequences used for alignment
  Refinement of the Boundaries of NBD1 NBD1 was originally defined as going from amino acid F433 to amino acid I586 (human CFTR notation throughout the text) (Riordan et al. 1989 ; fig. 2). This definition has subsequently been modified by several structural models (Annereau et al. 1997 ; Bianchet et al. 1997 ; Hoedemaeker, Davidson, and Rose 1998 ), whose common feature is an extended COOH terminus of NBD1 beyond residue I586. Complementary to these observations, the originally defined R domain has also been challenged (Chen, Scotet, and Ferec 2000 and references therein). In particular, the boundaries of NBD1 were recently investigated with a carefully designed functional approach, where CFTR channel constructs were severed near the likely NH2- or COOH-terminal boundaries of NBD1, systematically along the primary sequence, and successful assembly of each pair of channel segments was measured by CFTR channel activity (Chan et al. 2000) . With each additional piece of information, the precise boundaries of NBD1 have begun to emerge, and here they are tentatively defined as going from P439 to G646 (fig. 2 ).
The new definition of the NH2 terminus of NBD1 combines the following considerations. The principal evidence comes from evolutionary data. As illustrated in figure 2 , there is a sharp increase in sequence conservation beginning at P439 in comparison with the immediately preceding sequence. The first six amino acids of the originally defined NBD1 (i.e., F433 to T438) are quite divergent (even to the extent of deletions having occurred in several species), and the upstream region is a divergent sequence track of 20 amino acids. In contrast, downstream of P439, not only is there a stringently conserved three-amino-acid motif (i.e., P439-V440-L441), but also most of the nonstringently conserved residues from K442 to A457 have changes mainly involving substitutions between conservative amino acids, and this region is then followed by the highly conserved Walker A motif (GSTGAGKT, amino acid 458 to amino acid 465). A similar transition from divergence to sequence conservation is also present in the equivalent location of the aligned sequences of other ABC transporter family members, as illustrated in a sequence comparison of the 17 bacterial membrane proteins that form the periplasmic permease gene family (Mimura, Holbrook, and Ames 1991 ). Second, this definition is consistent with most of the structural models of human CFTR, where the NH2 terminus of NBD1 was regarded as T438 (Higgins 1992 ), L441 (Bianchet et al. 1997 ), and around V440 (Hoedemaeker, Davidson, and Rose 1998 ), respectively. This definition also appears to correlate reasonably well with the three-dimensional crystal structure of HisP (the ATP-binding subunit of the bacterial histidine transporter), where P439 would be predicted to occur at the very beginning of the second ss strand of HisP (Hung et al. 1998 ). Third, this definition falls within amino acids N432 to E449 the functionally defined NH2 terminus of NBD1 (Chan et al. 2000) . Finally, this definition is given further support by the mutational pattern in this transitional region (fig. 2 ).
However, one may argue that the new definition of the NH2 terminus of NBD1 might have inappropriately excluded the sequences aligned to the first ss strand of HisP (Hung et al. 1998 ). Of particular relevance to this point is residue F433, an aromatic amino acid that corresponds to residue Y16 of the HisP. The structure of HisP has been considered a good model for the binding of ATP to an NBD, in which the aromatic Y16 was confirmed to play a critical role (as determined by mutational studies by Shyamala et al. [1991 ]). Moreover, the structures of the other two prokaryotic NBD proteins, LivF and the amino-terminal NBD of RbsA, show a very similar binding interaction between the NBD and ATP, that is, the side chain of an aromatic residue (analogous to Y16 in HisP) interacts with the adenine ring of ATP to stabilize nucleotide binding. Furthermore, an aromatic residue 20 to 30 amino acids upstream of the start of the Walker A motif (in a similar position relative to Y16 in HisP) is conserved in other ABC transporter NBDs (summarized in Berger and Welsh 2000) . By inference, F433 in the human CFTR may participate in ATP binding. However, a recent functional analysis has refuted such a possibility and highlighted the unique structure of CFTR NBD compared with other NBD structures (Berger and Welsh 2000) . Undoubtedly, this finding adds further weight to the newly defined NBD1.
We previously defined the NH2 terminus of the R domain as beginning at C647 (Chen, Scotet, and Ferec 2000) . Consequently, G646 could be considered the COOH terminus of NBD1. However, the concurrent functional approach defined the COOH terminus of NBD1 as occurring between G622 and Q634 (Chan et al. 2000) . Nevertheless, G646 seems to be a more logical positioning of the true boundary linking NBD1 and the R domain in CFTR. In addition to the previous arguments (Chen, Scotet, and Ferec 2000) , further supporting evidence also exists. Again, the principal evidence comes from evolutionary data. As indicated in figure 2 , the sequence from S623 to G646 is as well conserved as that from F587 to G622; the latter is the common part of the extended NBD1 in the two studies (Chan et al. 2000; Chen, Scotet, and Ferec 2000) . Perhaps a more important indication comes from a sequence alignment with other ABC transporter NBDs; for example, HisP ends exactly at residue G646 of the human CFTR homolog (see fig. 5 in Hung et al. 1998 ). Moreover, it is important to note that the functional assembly of paired CFTR segments severed at L633/Q634 is not as good as that of those cleaved at N432/F433 (Chan et al. 2000) . In this regard, it will be interesting to compare paired CFTR fragments cleaved at the newly defined NBD1/R domain boundary (i.e., G646/C647) with those cleaved at L633/Q634.
Refinement of the Boundaries of NBD2 The original location in the amino acid sequence of NBD2 is from Y1219 to R1386 (Riordan et al. 1989 ; fig. 2). Historically, NBD2 has received much less attention than NBD1. Now, with the boundaries of NBD1 redefined, those of NBD2 can be similarly refined. Accordingly, the NH2 terminus of NBD2 could be defined as going from A1225 by reference to the relative position of the highly conserved Walker A motif, and this also correlates fairly well with the mutational pattern (the appearance of missense mutations clustering around the Walker A motif: GRTGSGKS, at amino acid 1244 to amino acid 1251) in the transitional region in NBD2 (fig. 2 ). However, when the COOH terminus of NBD2 is extended to P1443 by reference to the redefined NBD1 (see also fig. 5 in Hung et al. 1998 ), the very COOH-terminal portion of this "new NBD2" shows poor sequence conservation. Yet, this is not so surprising if it is considered in the context of the ABC transporter family, where for example, its counterpart region in the 17 bacterial periplasmic permeases is similarly divergent (Mimura, Holbrook, and Ames 1991 ). Thus, it seems clear that the very COOH-terminal portions of NBDs are, in general, less functionally restrained throughout the ABC transporter family, although this is in stark contrast to the NBD1 of CFTR, where the very COOH-terminal portion is highly conserved (fig. 2 ). While it is not clear whether this sequence conservation is related to the immediately following R domain (which is unique to CFTR), it lends further weight to the unique structure of CFTR NBD1.
Although P1443 could represent the COOH terminus of a "new NBD2," this should not be accepted without any reservations. The significant sequence divergence of the very COOH-terminal portion of this "new NBD2," the different structural requirements of a CFTR NBD compared with other ABC transporter NBDs in general (Berger and Welsh 2000) , and the differential roles between the CFTR NBD1 and NBD2 in particular (discussed below) argue for an alternative definition. Here again, it is reassuring how well the evolutionary data, clinical observations, and functional studies concur. The initial location of sequence divergence in this transitional region was clearly situated at E1418 (fig. 2 ). In addition, the shortest truncation that is associated with CF disease (with pancreatic insufficiency and recurrent pulmonary infection) terminates at Q1412 (http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr). Furthermore, a review of several functional studies clearly points to the fact that CFTR truncated at/or upstream of V1415 significantly affects the biogenesis, maturation, and stability of the protein, but those molecules truncated at or downstream of N1419 do not (Rich et al. 1993 ; Zhang et al. 1998 ; Haardt et al. 1999 ; Gentzsch and Riordan 2001 ). These three lines of observation, together with the mutational pattern in this region, strongly suggest that residue E1417 can be confidently assigned as the COOH terminus of NBD2. This new definition is also further validated by the analysis which has redefined the C-tail of the CFTR (discussed below).
Functional Delineation of the C-Tail The COOH terminus of NBD2 could naturally be anticipated to be the NH2 boundary of the C-tail, and this appears to best delineate its functional role in the CFTR. On the one hand, the newly defined C-tail is "nonessential," as the effects on the biogenesis, processing, and stability of the CFTR previously assigned to the original C-tail have now been relocated to within the newly defined NBD2. Moreover, even the two trafficking signals thought to reside in the newly defined C-terminal tail, at Y1424 and the dileucine pair at L1430-L1431, have been demonstrated not to alter the steady-state amount of nascent or mature CFTR in recent functional studies (Gentzsch and Riordan 2001) . On the other hand, the newly defined C-tail does appear to be "essential," as the well-conserved motif involving the final three amino acids (TRL) represents a PDZ-interacting domain which is required for the polarization of CFTR to the apical plasma membrane in epithelial cells (Moyer et al. 2000) . Even so, it is important to note that this PDZ-binding motif alone is not sufficient for the polarized distribution of CFTR (Milewski et al. 2001) . Therefore, the C-tail as a whole would play a minor role in the pathogenesis of CF disease. Indeed, neither S1455X (Mickle et al. 1998 ) nor Q1476X (http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr) caused a severe CF phenotype. By inference, any single missense mutations identified in the C-tail may not have a significant functional consequence. Consistent with this hypothesis, none of the three missense mutations identified in this region (fig. 2 ) can be confidently assigned as causal for CF disease; for example, R1422W was identified in a CF patient who also carried the mutations F508del and D993Y, and R1453W was identified in a patient with diffuse panbronchiolitis (http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr). Finally, attention may be drawn to the well conserved, negatively charged motif (E1469 to E1474) in the C-tail.
Further Insights into the Differential Function of NBD1 and NBD2 That the two NBDs are not functionally equivalent was immediately noticed in the early 1990s. Not only were CF-associated mutations found predominantly in CFTR's NBD1 as opposed to NBD2, but also mutations of homologous amino acid residues within NBD1 or NBD2 resulted in different effects on CFTR maturation and function (Cheng et al. 1990 ; Gregory et al. 1991 ). More recently, the different roles of NBD1 and NBD2 in the CFTR chloride channel and the regulation of other ion channels have been further investigated through a variety of approaches (e.g., Szabo et al. 1999 ; Cahill et al. 2000 ; Mickle et al. 2000 ; Aleksandrov et al. 2001 ).
Apart from the fact that there are more disease-associated mutations in NBD1 than in NBD2, and more than half of the most common missense mutations or single-amino-acid deletions occur in NBD1, figure 2 reveals an additional interesting observation regarding mutational patterns in the well-conserved motifs in the NBDs. While there are 17 missense mutations clustered in the LSGGQ motif (LSGGQ, amino acids 548 to 552) and the Walker B motif (RAVYKDADLYLLD, amino acids 560 to 572) in NBD1, there are only four missense mutations in the equivalent regions (LSHGH [amino acids 1346 to 1350] and RSVLSKAKILLLD [amino acids 1358 to 1370]) of NBD2. Conversely, while there is only one missense mutation in the Walker A motif (GSTGAGKT, amino acids 458 to 465) in NBD1, there are five mutations in the corresponding motif (GRTGSGKS, amino acids 1244 to 1251) in NBD2. This finding is intriguing since, on the one hand, although Walker A and Walker B are presumably both involved in ATP binding and hydrolysis, the exact mechanisms remain largely unknown. On the other hand, while it is generally believed that ATP hydrolysis at NBD1 and NBD2 may drive channel opening and closing, respectively (reviewed by Nagel 1999 ), recent biochemical analysis suggests that opening and closing may occur as a consequence of nucleotide binding and dissociation or hydrolysis at a functional unit involving both domains (Aleksandrov et al. 2001) . Therefore, it is tempting to ask whether the distinct mutational patterns in these important motifs are linked intrinsically to functional differences of the Walker A and Walker B sites within the two NBDs. Elucidation of this question would improve our understanding of the basic physiology of CFTR, as well as that of other ABC transporters. Nevertheless, this observation gives further support to the idea that NBD1 and NBD2 make different contributions to the gating of CFTR channels.
Further Insights into the Differential Role of MSD1 (F81 to V350) and MSD2 (I860 to S1150) Each MSD was predicted to contain six transmembrane segments (TMs), three extracellular loops (ECLs), and two intracellular loops (ICLs). As in the case of the two NBDs, functional differences have also been found for the two MSDs (e.g., Yue, Devidas, and Guggino 2000) . A comparison of the stringently conserved residues in the TMs of the two MSDs reveals that the TMs in MSD1 are generally more conserved than those in MSD2 (data not shown; see also fig. 2 ); TM6 (12 out of 21 residues; 57.1%) and TM12 (11 out of 22 residues; 50.0%) are the most conserved motifs in the two MSDs, respectively, and TM6 is the most conserved of all. The evolutionary conservation of these regions correlates perfectly with analysis that suggests that (1) TM6 and TM12 line the CFTR pore, (2) TM6 is the main determinant of the pore properties of CFTR, and (3) MSD1 and MSD2 each contribute differently to CFTR pore properties (Sheppard and Welsh 1999 ).
A defining feature of ion channels is their selectivity, the ability to pass certain ions at a high rate while at the same time effectively excluding others. While discrimination between different cations in certain cation channels is known to occur over a short region of the pore known as the selectivity filter, the existence of a discrete anion selectivity filter in the pores of Cl- channels is controversial (Linsdell, Evagelidis, and Hanrahan 2000) . Nevertheless, based on the above-mentioned evolutionary data, such a selectivity filter in the CFTR, if it indeed exists, would most likely be located in the most highly conserved TM TM6. Not surprisingly, the anion selectivity (Br-  >  Cl-  >  I-) of the CFTR pore was found to be mainly determined by the first half of the protein (Yue, Devidas, and Guggino 2000) , and mutations in several residues in TM6, including K335 (Anderson et al. 1991 ), F337 (Linsdell, Evagelidis, and Hanrahan 2000) , T338 (Linsdell, Zheng, and Hanrahan 1998 ), and R347 (Cheung and Akabas 1997 ), were shown to significantly affect anion selectivity. Moreover, the stringently conserved motif T351-R352-Q353 immediately downstream of TM6 has also been suggested to loop back into the channel, narrowing the lumen and thereby forming both the major resistance to current flow and the anion selectivity filter (Cheung and Akabas 1997 ). Assuming that an anion selectivity filter resides in the vicinity of TM6, it is interesting to note the presence of another highly conserved motif also in this vicinity (Q359-T360-W361-Y362-D363). Furthermore, there is also a similarly stringently conserved motif downstream of TM12 in MSD2, L1156-M1157-R1158-S1159-V1160.
Inspection of figure 2 also reveals that the four ICLs are generally more conserved than the TM and ECL subdomains in the MSDs. To date, most of the missense mutations identified in each ICL and a 19-amino-acid deletion concerning ICL2 have been investigated by functional analysis (reviewed in Sheppard and Welsh 1999 ). These studies strongly indicated that the ICLs were critical for correct protein processing. Among the four ICLs, ICL4 (amino acid Q1035 to amino acid R1102, with a sequence homology as high as 72% across the 15 CFTR species) turns out to be the most conserved subdomain in the entire CFTR sequence. This stringent sequence conservation, coupled with a cluster of missense mutations identified in this subdomain (among which two homozygosities, H1085R [Yoshimura et al. 1999 ] and R1066C [Casals et al. 1997 ], cause a severe CF phenotype), undoubtedly underlies its functional significance within CFTR. While a large fraction of the analyzed ICL4 missense mutations disrupted the biosynthetic processing of CFTR, this was not universally the case. Most importantly, those processed mutants had no discernible effect on the channel's pore properties, but they did alter gating behavior, the response to increasing concentrations of ATP, and stimulation in response to pyrophosphate (Cotten et al. 1996 ; Seibert et al. 1996 ). Thus, ICL4, and probably the other three ICLs, may actively participate in interdomain interactions; for example, they may link the NBDs to MSDs, thereby coupling the activity of NBDs to the gating of the channel.
Possible Motifs Implicated in the Interdomain Interaction Between the NH2-Terminal Tail (N-tail; M1 to R80) and the R Domain An eliciting finding is that the N-tail controls CFTR channel gating through a physical interaction with the R domain. Not surprisingly, this positive regulatory activity was mapped to a cluster of acidic residues, D47, E51, E54, and D58, within the highly charged and conserved motif D44 to E60 (fig. 2 ). Since no effects of any of the N-tail mutations on steady-state phosphorylation in vitro or in vivo were detected, the N-tail most likely modulates channel activity by controlling access of the phosphorylated R domain to inhibitory or stimulatory sites within the channel (Naren et al. 1999 ).
The fact that a cluster of stringently conserved acidic residues in the N-tail appears to bind to part of the R domain (most probably the region involving amino acids 708 to 740 and the nearby surrounding sequences; Naren et al. 1999 ) is significant. As illustrated in figure 2 , there are three highly conserved, positively charged motifs (K696-R697-K698, R709-K710, and R764-R765-R766) in this region. Although the conservation of these motifs may be explained by the fact that they potentially participate in phosphorylation of the R domain, the possibility that all, or at least some, of them serve as counterparts to the acidic residues in the N-tail cannot be excluded, particularly if the fact that none of them appear to be phosphyorylated by PKA in vivo is taken into account (Cheng et al. 1991 ). More recently, a relatively small portion of the R domain (residues 760 to 783) that encompasses the stringently conserved motif (R765-R766-Q767-S768-V769-L760) was found to be critical for the prevention of constitutive activity of the CFTR (Baldursson et al. 2001) . This further highlights the functional importance of these motifs when it is considered that they are conserved even within the most evolutionarily divergent R domain sequences. Future studies focusing on these motifs may result in the revelation of further novel molecular mechanisms.
How Many Missense Mutations Are Functional? Unlike splicing and truncating mutations, it is always difficult to assign a definitive role to missense mutations, especially when they are detected in single cases. Functional analysis provides important data, but extrapolation to clinical effects may not be straightforward. This can be seen in the conflicting results that often occur in some aspects of CF research, exemplified by the two different models for salt and water transport across epithelia (reviewed by Wine 1999 ), as well as the disparity among results on the intracellular localization of F508del-CFTR (reviewed by Drumm 1999 ). There is ongoing effort to tackle this issue (e.g., the CF European Network: the Second Consensus Meeting Towards Validation of CFTR Gene Expression and Functional Assays, Estoril, March 30 to  April 1, 2001).
We believe that a combined analysis of the currently available data can complement this effort and enhance our understanding of the identified mutations, particularly those that are missense. Taking advantage of the previously redefined R domain, a systemic evaluation of the missense mutations occurring in this region was produced, and as a result, some of these mutations, such as F693L, V754M, and T760M, were identified as being likely to represent neutral polymorphisms (Chen, Scotet, and Ferec 2000) . Similarly, the missense mutations occurring in evolutionarily divergent regions, for example, N418S, G424S, Q890R, and K1177R, may also represent neutral polymorphisms. At the other extreme, for example, the mutations I506M and F508C, which occur in stringently conserved residues in the functionally important NBD1, have also been confirmed to be nonfunctional variants (Kobayashi et al. 1990 ; Kalin, Dork, and Tummler 1992 ; Will et al. 1992 ). The assignment of mutations as in these two extreme cases would raise a serious concern that a certain fraction of the identified missense mutations in classic and atypical CF patients may in fact merely represent polymorphisms rather than mutations associated with the disease. If this assumption is correct, it is not unreasonable to infer that the truly causal mutation event may remain unidentified in a certain fraction of patients in whom the disease has been incorrectly assumed to be caused by identified "missense mutations."
The above assumption is further supported by the following considerations. The large size of the CFTR gene makes it difficult to analyze the entire coding sequence, not to mention the intronic sequence. Consequently, initial identification of one DNA variant may discourage further screening efforts, thereby ignoring a second variant in cis in the gene. Even if the whole CFTR gene were analyzed, certain variants, such as large deletions within the gene (which are being detected at an increasing rate; http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/cftr), are still not readily detected by common mutational screening techniques (Girodon-Boulandet, Cazeneuve, and Goossens 2000) . In addition, the promoter sequence (Romey et al. 1999 ) and the upstream regulatory region (Nuthall et al. 1999 ) of the CFTR gene may be targets for extended mutational screening. Moreover, mutations in other genes in certain CF-like disease subjects should be considered (Mekus et al. 1998 ).
Taken together, it is likely that a certain fraction of the missense mutations identified in the CFTR gene may be ultimately confirmed to be nonpathological polymorphisms. It is even possible that some of them may turn out to be modifiers of another variant in the CFTR gene or even in another gene. An answer to this question will significantly improve our understanding of the disease, as well as that of the protein itself. Nevertheless, this vast number of missense mutations represents an invaluable resource for exploring the subtlety of the CFTR structure-function relationship, and figure 2 could serve as an important complement to ongoing mutation detection and functional analysis efforts in the CF field.
A Comprehensive Phylogenetic Analysis: Implications for Animal Models of CF An additional dividend of the availability of a large number of CFTR sequences is their benefit concerning the use of animal models in CF studies. We had previously suggested that the rabbit could be a better CF model than the current murine model, mainly based on (1) anatomical and developmental data, (2) comparison of CFTR promotor sequences and partial coding sequences, and (3) phylogenetic analysis of those sequences (Vuillaumier et al. 1997 ). Although sequence comparisons clearly showed a higher similarity between rabbit and primate sequences than between murine and primate sequences or even between rabbit and murine sequences, the phylogenetic implications were ambiguous.
A long-branch attraction artifact (Felsenstein 1978 ) of the murine lineage toward the outgroup was suspected (Vuillaumier et al. 1997 ). This classical artifact of phylogenetics concerns all tree reconstruction methods. It occurs when rates of character change vary among lineages, provoking in trees the grouping of lineages sharing close rates, whatever the evolutionary relationships. To solve this ambiguity, additional sequence data (particularly from further species) were required for a successful analysis. When all of the full-length CFTR amino acid sequences were analyzed in this study (fig. 1 ), the murine lineage was the most basal of the placental mammals, a strange result possibly due to a long-branch attraction. Moreover, the position of the rabbit was ambiguous. In the most parsimonious tree (fig. 1 ) and in the neighbor-joining tree from corrected distances (data not shown), the rabbit is a sister group to the bovids + primates clade. In the neighbor-joining tree based on uncorrected distances, the rabbit is the sister group to the primates as in our previous report (Vuillaumier et al. 1997 ). When an extended set of exon 13 to coding sequences including a nonplacental mammal (the kangaroo) and another nonmurid rodent (guinea pig) were analyzed (fig. 3 ), the guinea pig represented a sister group to the rabbit corresponding to the Glires (node E), while the murids were still the most basal of the placental mammals. Assuming that rodents are a monophyletic group (Novacek and Wyss 1986 ; Luckett and Hartenberger 1993 ; Philippe 1997 ), it appears that the murids are artifactually basal in the placental tree, as they should be a sister group to the guinea pig within clade E. Thus, the high level of divergence of the mouse sequence not only makes the mouse an inappropriate model for CF studies, but also provokes a phylogenetic artifact. Unfortunately, the addition of the kangaroo sequence did not correct this artifact, as it was added as a taxon closer to placental mammals than the frog is, in order to break a long branch that could have reduced the possibility of the murid long-branch attraction. Nevertheless, the conclusions from the phylogenetic analysis do not challenge the proposition of the rabbit as a better CF model whose sequence is more closely related to humans (than murine species are). Additionally, the guinea pig appears to be an equally good model candidate.
View larger version (16K):    Fig. 3. The most parsimonious tree from the nucleotide sequences encoding CFTR exon 13 using the branch-and-bound search of PAUP* 4.0b4a (Swofford 1999 ). The sequence length is 618 positions, from which 75 positions have been removed because they corresponded to two independent insertions in the teleost sequences, yielding 543 positions, of which 397 were variable and 343 were informative for parsimony. Taking the above inserted/deleted regions into account produces an identical tree. The tree length is 1,134, with a consistency index of 0.665 and a retention index of 0.705. Branch lengths are given using ACCTRAN optimization. Numbers above the nodes are bootstrap proportions obtained from 1,000 replicates. The same tree was recovered with the neighbor-joining method (Saitou and Nei 1987 ) except for the position of the puffer fish, which is a sister group of the killifish in the neighbor-joining tree. When the exon 13 to encoding amino acids were analyzed (data not shown), sequence variability and phylogenetic information was lost. Consequently, nodes C, D, and E collapsed, preventing any conclusion about the interrelationships of placental mammals from the amino acid data set. The EMBL accession number for the sequence alignment is ALIGN_000079
     Conclusions TOP Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results and Discussion Conclusions Acknowledgements References   In summary, we expanded the already large number of CFTR homologs by determining additional sequences from the Atlantic salmon and the eastern gray kangaroo. Particularly, we cloned two distinct CFTR sequences from the Atlantic salmon, the first time that two isoforms of CFTR have ever been reported in a single species. The availability of this newly expanded set of CFTR homologs has allowed the most comprehensive cross-species sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis ever to be performed. While the combined analysis of the current mutational, structural, and functional data in conjunction with the above sequence comparison has yielded tantalizing insights into the global CFTR structure-function relationship, the comprehensive phylogenetic analysis reinforces the idea that the rabbit may represent a better CF model than the mouse and strengthens the assertion that a long-branch attraction artifact separates the murine rodents from the rabbit and the guinea pig, the other Glires. Hopefully, the refined boundaries of the two NBDs and the C-tail and the proposed CF model animal will provide a framework for future investigations, and the stringently conserved motifs within CFTR may represent good candidates or targets for identifying sites participating in inter- or intramolecular interactions. Such knowledge will help to further resolve the diversity and complexity of CFTR defects and lead to a better treatment of the disease.
View larger version (111K):    Fig. 2 (Continued)
  View larger version (113K):    Fig. 2 (Continued)
  View larger version (126K):    Fig. 2 (Continued)
  View larger version (80K):    Fig. 3 (Continued)
  View larger version (69K):    Fig. 3 (Continued)
  View larger version (78K):    Fig. 3 (Continued)
     Acknowledgements TOP Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results and Discussion Conclusions Acknowledgements References   We thank Isabelle Quere for technical assistance, Dr. Rigoulet from the Vincennes Zoo in Paris for the kangaroo DNA, the two anonymous referees for their helpful criticisms, and Sylvain Rivard for reading the revised manuscript. This work was supported by the Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, France, the Natural Environment Research Council and the Wellcome Trust, United Kingdom.
   Footnotes   William Jeffery, Reviewing Editor
1 Keywords: cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator missense mutation structure and disease models phylogeny Atlantic salmon rabbit
2 Address for correspondence and reprints: Claude Ferec, Etablissement Francais du Sang to Bretagne, Universite de Bretagne Occidentale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, 46 rue Felix Le Dantec, 29275 Brest, France. claude.ferec{at}univ-brest.fr
   References TOP Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results and Discussion Conclusions Acknowledgements References  
Aleksandrov L., A. Mengos, X. Chang, A. Aleksandrov, J. R. Riordan, 2001 Differential interactions of nucleotides at the two nucleotide binding domains of CFTR J. Biol. Chem 276:12918-12923[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Anderson M. P., R. J. Gregory, S. Thompson, D. W. Souza, S. Paul, R. C. Mulligan, A. E. Smith, M. J. Welsh, 1991 Demonstration that CFTR is a chloride channel by alteration of its anion selectivity Science 253:202-205[ISI][Medline]
Annereau J. P., U. Wulbrand, A. Vankeerberghen, H. Cuppens, F. Bontems, B. Tummler, J. J. Cassiman, V. Stoven, 1997 A novel model for the first nucleotide binding domain of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator FEBS Lett 407:303-308[ISI][Medline]
Baldursson O., H. A. Berger, M. J. Welsh, 2000 Contribution of R domain phosphoserines to the function of CFTR studied in Fischer rat thyroid epithelia Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol 279:L835-L841[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Baldursson O., L. S. Ostedgaard, T. Rokhlina, J. F. Cotten, M. J. Welsh, 2001 CFTR Cl-channels with R domain deletions and translocations show phosphorylation-dependent and independent activity J. Biol. Chem 276:1904-1910[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Berger A. L., M. J. Welsh, 2000 Differences between cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator and HisP in the interaction with the adenine ring of ATP J. Biol. Chem 275:29407-29412[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Bianchet M. A., Y. H. Ko, L. M. Amzel, P. L. Pedersen, 1997 Modeling of nucleotide binding domains of ABC transporter proteins based on a F1-ATPase/recA topology: structural model of the nucleotide binding domains of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) J. Bioenerg. Biomembr 29:503-524[ISI][Medline]
Buf G., 1993 Seawater adaptation strategies in salmonids Pp. 61 to 80 in B. Lahlou and P. Vitiello, eds. Aquaculture: fundamental and applied research. Coastal and estuarine studies. American Geophysical Union, Washington, D.C
Bremer K., 1994 Branch support and tree stability Cladistics 10:295-304[ISI]
Cahill P., M. W. Nason Jr.,, C. Ambrose, T. Y. Yao, P. Thomas, M. E. Egan, 2000 Identification of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator domains that are important for interactions with ROMK2 J. Biol. Chem 275:16697-16701[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Casals T., P. Pacheco, C. Barreto, et al. (20 co-authors) 1997 Missense mutation R1066C in the second transmembrane domain of CFTR causes a severe cystic fibrosis phenotype: study of 19 heterozygous and 2 homozygous patients Hum. Mutat 10:387-392[ISI][Medline]
Chan K. W., L. Csanady, D. Seto-Young, A. C. Nairn, D. C. Gadsby, 2000 Severed molecules functionally define the boundaries of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator's NH(2)-terminal nucleotide binding domain J. Gen. Physiol 116:163-180[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Chen J. M., V. Scotet, C. Ferec, 2000 Definition of a "functional R domain" of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Mol. Genet. Metab 71:245-249[ISI][Medline]
Cheng S. H., R. J. Gregory, J. Marshall, S. Paul, D. W. Souza, G. A. White, C. R. O'Riordan, A. E. Smith, 1990 Defective intracellular transport and processing of CFTR is the molecular basis of most cystic fibrosis Cell 63:827-834[ISI][Medline]
Cheng S. H., D. P. Rich, J. Marshall, R. J. Gregory, M. J. Welsh, A. E. Smith, 1991 Phosphorylation of the R domain by cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulates the CFTR chloride channel Cell 66:1027-1036[ISI][Medline]
Cheung M., M. H. Akabas, 1997 Locating the anion-selectivity filter of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) chloride channel J. Gen. Physiol 109:289-299[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Choi J. Y., D. Muallem, K. Kiselyov, M. G. Lee, P. J. Thomas, S. Muallem, 2001 Aberrant CFTR-dependent HCO3-transport in mutations associated with cystic fibrosis Nature 410:94-97[ISI][Medline]
Cotten J. F., L. S. Ostedgaard, M. R. Carson, M. J. Welsh, 1996 Effect of cystic fibrosis to associated mutations in the fourth intracellular loop of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator J. Biol. Chem 271:21279-21284[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Csanady L., K. W. Chan, D. Seto-Young, D. C. Kopsco, A. C. Nairn, D. C. Gadsby, 2000 Severed channels probe regulation of gating of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator by its cytoplasmic domains J. Gen. Physiol 116:477-500[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Cutler C. P., S. Brezillon, S. Bekir, I. L. Sanders, N. Hazon, G. Cramb, 2000 Expression of a duplicate Na,K-ATPase beta(1)-isoform in the European eel (Anguilla anguilla) Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol 279:R222-R229[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Davidson H., M. S. Taylor, A. Doherty, A. C. Boyd, D. J. Porteous, 2000 Genomic sequence analysis of Fugu rubripes CFTR and flanking genes in a 60 kb region conserving synteny with 800 kb of human chromosome 7 Genome Res 10:1194-1203[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Diamond G., T. F. Scanlin, M. A. Zasloff, C. L. Bevins, 1991 A cross-species analysis of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. Potential functional domains and regulatory sites J. Biol. Chem 266:22761-22769[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Drumm M., 1999 What happens to deltaF508 in vivo? J. Clin. Invest 103:1369-1370[Free Full Text]
Fiedler M. A., Z. K. Nemecz, G. E. Shull, 1992 Cloning and sequence analysis of rat cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Am. J. Physiol 262:L779-L784[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Felsenstein J., 1978 Cases in which parsimony or compatibility methods will be positively misleading Syst. Zool 27:401-410[ISI]
Gadsby D. C., A. C. Nairn, 1999 Control of CFTR gating by phosphorylation and nucleotide hydrolysis Physiol. Rev 79:S77-S107[Medline]
Gentzsch M., J. R. Riordan, 2001 Localization of sequences within the C-terminal domain of CFTR which impact maturation and stability J. Biol. Chem 276:1291-1298[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Girodon-Boulandet E., C. Cazeneuve, M. Goossens, 2000 Screening practices for mutations in the CFTR gene ABCC7 Hum. Mutat 15:135-149[ISI][Medline]
Gregory R. J., D. P. Rich, S. H. Cheng, D. W. Souza, S. Paul, P. Manavalan, M. P. Anderson, M. J. Welsh, A. E. Smith, 1991 Maturation and function of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator variants bearing mutations in putative nucleotide-binding domains 1 and 2 Mol. Cell. Biol 11:3886-3893[ISI][Medline]
Haardt M., M. Benharouga, D. Lechardeur, N. Kartner, G. L. Lukacs, 1999 C-terminal truncations destabilize the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator without impairing its biogenesis. A novel class of mutation J. Biol. Chem 274:21873-21877[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Higgins C. F., 1992 ABC transporters: from microorganisms to man Annu. Rev. Cell Biol 8:67-113[ISI]
Hoedemaeker F. J., A. R. Davidson, D. R. Rose, 1998 A model for the nucleotide-binding domains of ABC transporters based on the large domain of aspartate aminotransferase Proteins 30:275-286[ISI][Medline]
Hordvik I., 1998 The impact of ancestral tetraploidy on antibody heterogeneity in salmonid fishes Immunol. Rev 166:153-157[ISI][Medline]
Hung L. W., I. X. Wang, K. Nikaido, P. Q. Liu, G. F. Ames, S. H. Kim, 1998 Crystal structure of the ATP-binding subunit of an ABC transporter Nature 396:703-707[ISI][Medline]
Kalin N., T. Dork, B. Tummler, 1992 A cystic fibrosis allele encoding missense mutations in both nucleotide binding folds of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Hum. Mutat 1:204-210[Medline]
Kerem B., J. M. Rommens, J. A. Buchanan, D. Markiewicz, T. K. Cox, A. Chakravarti, M. Buchwald, L. C. Tsui, 1989 Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene: genetic analysis Science 245:1073-1080[ISI][Medline]
Kobayashi K., M. R. Knowles, R. C. Boucher, W. E. O'Brien, A. L. Beaudet, 1990 Benign missense variations in the cystic fibrosis gene Am. J. Hum. Genet 47:611-615[ISI][Medline]
Kimura M., 1983 Rare variant alleles in the light of the neutral theory Mol. Biol. Evol 1:84-93[Abstract]
Lecointre G., 1994 Aspects historiques et heuristiques de l'ichtyologie systematique Cybium 18:339-430
Linsdell P., A. Evagelidis, J. W. Hanrahan, 2000 Molecular determinants of anion selectivity in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator chloride channel pore Biophys. J 78:2973-2982[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Linsdell P., S. X. Zheng, J. W. Hanrahan, 1998 Non-pore lining amino acid side chains influence anion selectivity of the human CFTR Cl-channel expressed in mammalian cell lines J. Physiol 512:1-16[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Luckett W. P., J. L. Hartenberger, 1993 Monophyly or polyphyly of the order Rodentia: possible conflict between morphological and molecular interpretations J. Mamm. Evol 1:127-147
Marshall J., K. A. Martin, M. Picciotto, S. Hockfield, A. C. Nairn, L. K. Kaczmarek, 1991 Identification and localization of a dogfish homolog of human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator J. Biol. Chem 266:22749-22754[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Mekus F., M. Ballmann, I. Bronsveld, T. Dork, J. Bijman, B. Tummler, H. J. Veeze, 1998 Cystic-fibrosis-like disease unrelated to the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Hum. Genet 102:582-586[ISI][Medline]
Meyer A., E. Malaga-Trillo, 1999 Vertebrate genomics: more fishy tales about Hox genes Curr. Biol 9:R210-R213[ISI][Medline]
Mickle J. E., G. R. Cutting, 2000 A killifish model to study the role of CFTR in absorptive and secretory epithelia (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet 67:S394
Mickle J. E., M. Macek Jr.,, S. B. Fulmer-Smentek, M. M. Egan, E. Schwiebert, W. Guggino, R. Moss, G. R. Cutting, 1998 A mutation in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene associated with elevated sweat chloride concentrations in the absence of cystic fibrosis Hum. Mol. Genet 7:729-735[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Mickle J. E., M. I. Milewski, M. Macek Jr.,, G. R. Cutting, 2000 Effects of cystic fibrosis and congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens to associated mutations on cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator-mediated regulation of separate channels Am. J. Hum. Genet 66:1485-1495[ISI][Medline]
Milewski M., J. Mickle, J. Forrest, D. Stafford, B. Moyer, J. Cheng, W. Guggino, B. Stanton, G. Cutting, 2001 A PDZ-binding motif is essential but not sufficient to localize the C terminus of CFTR to the apical membrane J. Cell Sci 114:719-726[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Mimura C. S., S. R. Holbrook, G. F. Ames, 1991 Structural model of the nucleotide-binding conserved component of periplasmic permeases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:84-88[Abstract]
Moyer B. D., M. Duhaime, C. Shaw, et al. (14 co-authors) 2000 The PDZ-interacting domain of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator is required for functional expression in the apical plasma membrane J. Biol. Chem 275:27069-27074[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Nagel G., 1999 Differential function of the two nucleotide binding domains on cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1461:263-274[ISI][Medline]
Naren A. P., E. Cormet-Boyaka, J. Fu, M. Villain, J. E. Blalock, M. W. Quick, K. L. Kirk, 1999 CFTR chloride channel regulation by an interdomain interaction Science 286:544-548[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Novacek M. J., A. Wyss, 1986 Higher level relationships of the recent eutherian orders: morphological evidence Cladistics 2:257-287
Nuthall H. N., G. Vassaux, C. Huxley, A. Harris, 1999 Analysis of a DNase I hypersensitive site located -20.9 kb upstream of the CFTR gene Eur. J. Biochem 266:431-443[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Philippe H., 1993 MUST, a computer package of management utilities for sequences and trees Nucleic Acids Res 21:5264-5272[Abstract]
   . 1997 Rodent monophyly: pitfalls of molecular phylogenies J. Mol. Evol 45:712-715[ISI][Medline]
Price M. P., H. Ishihara, D. N. Sheppard, M. J. Welsh, 1996 Function of Xenopus cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) Cl channels and use of human-Xenopus chimeras to investigate the pore properties of CFTR J. Biol. Chem 271:25184-25191[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Rich D. P., R. J. Gregory, S. H. Cheng, A. E. Smith, M. J. Welsh, 1993 Effect of deletion mutations on the function of CFTR chloride channels Receptors Channels 1:221-232[ISI][Medline]
Riordan J. R., J. M. Rommens, B. Kerem, et al. (14 co-authors) 1989 Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene: cloning and characterization of complementary DNA Science 245:1066-1073[ISI][Medline]
Romey M. C., C. Guittard, S. Carles, J. Demaille, M. Claustres, M. Ramsay, 1999 First putative sequence alterations in the minimal CFTR promoter region J. Med. Genet 36:263-264[Free Full Text]
Rommens J. M., M. C. Iannuzzi, B. Kerem, et al. (15 co-authors) 1989 Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene: chromosome walking and jumping Science 245:1059-1065[ISI][Medline]
Saitou N., M. Nei, 1987 The neighbor-joining method: a new method for reconstructing phylogenetic trees Mol. Biol. Evol 4:406-425[Abstract]
Sehgal A., A. Presente, J. F. Engelhardt, 1996 Developmental expression patterns of CFTR in ferret tracheal surface airway and submucosal gland epithelia Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol 15:122-131[Abstract]
Seibert F. S., P. Linsdell, T. W. Loo, J. W. Hanrahan, D. M. Clarke, J. R. Riordan, 1996 Disease-associated mutations in the fourth cytoplasmic loop of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator compromise biosynthetic processing and chloride channel activity J. Biol. Chem 271:15139-15145[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Sheppard D. N., M. J. Welsh, 1999 Structure and function of the CFTR chloride channel Physiol. Rev 79:S23-S45[Medline]
Shyamala V., V. Baichwal, E. Beall, G. F. Ames, 1991 Structure-function analysis of the histidine permease and comparison with cystic fibrosis mutations J. Biol. Chem 266:18714-18719[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Singer T. D., K. M. Clements, P. M. Schulte, I. Fleming, B. Finstad, R. S. McKinley, 2000 Role of CFTR in seawater adaptation in Atlantic salmon (Abstract) Comp. Biochem. Physiol 126:S137
Singer T. D., S. J. Tucker, W. S. Marshall, C. F. Higgins, 1998 A divergent CFTR homologue: highly regulated salt transport in the euryhaline teleost F. heteroclitus Am. J. Physiol 274:C715-C723[ISI][Medline]
Swofford D. L., 1999 PAUP* Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony (*and other methods). Version 4. Sinauer, Sunderland, Mass
Szabo K., G. Szakacs, T. Hegeds, B. Sarkadi, 1999 Nucleotide occlusion in the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. Different patterns in the two nucleotide binding domains J. Biol. Chem 274:12209-12212[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Takeo J., S. Yamashita, 1999 Two distinct isoforms of cDNA encoding rainbow trout androgen receptors J. Biol. Chem 274:5674-5680[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Tata F., P. Stanier, C. Wicking, et al. (11 co-authors) 1991 Cloning the mouse homolog of the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene Genomics 10:301-307[ISI][Medline]
Tebbutt S. J., C. J. Wardle, D. F. Hill, A. Harris, 1995 Molecular analysis of the ovine cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:2293-2297[Abstract]
Tucker S. J., D. Tannahill, C. F. Higgins, 1992 Identification and developmental expression of the Xenopus laevis cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene Hum. Mol. Genet 1:77-82[Abstract]
Vuillaumier S., B. Kaltenboeck, G. Lecointre, P. Lehn, E. Denamur, 1997 Phylogenetic analysis of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene in mammalian species argues for the development of a rabbit model for cystic fibrosis Mol. Biol. Evol 14:372-380[Abstract]
Will K., M. Stuhrmann, H. Ellemunter, N. Hoffknecht, J. Schmidtke, 1992 Missense variation of the CFTR gene codon 507 Hum. Mutat 1:165[Medline]
Wine J. J., 1999 The genesis of cystic fibrosis lung disease J. Clin. Invest 103:309-312[Free Full Text]
Wine J. J., D. Glavac, G. Hurlock, C. Robinson, M. Lee, U. Potocnik, M. Ravnik-Glavac, M. Dean, 1998 Genomic DNA sequence of Rhesus (M. mulatta) cystic fibrosis (CFTR) gene Mamm. Genome 9:301-305[ISI][Medline]
Yorifuji T., W. K. Lemna, C. F. Ballard, C. L. Rosenbloom, R. Rozmahel, N. Plavsic, L. C. Tsui, A. L. Beaudet, 1991 Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of the murine cDNA for the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Genomics 10:547-550[ISI][Medline]
Yoshimura K., Y. Wakazono, S. Iizuka, N. Morokawa, H. Tada, Y. Eto, 1999 A Japanese patient homozygous for the H1085R mutation in the CFTR gene presents with a severe form of cystic fibrosis Clin. Genet 56:173-175[ISI][Medline]
Yue H., S. Devidas, W. B. Guggino, 2000 The two halves of CFTR form a dual-pore ion channel J. Biol. Chem 275:10030-10034[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Zhang L., D. Wang, H. Fischer, P. D. Fan, J. H. Widdicombe, Y. W. Kan, J. Y. Dong, 1998 Efficient expression of CFTR function with adeno-associated virus vectors that carry shortened CFTR genes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95:10158-10163[Abstract/Free Full Text]
Accepted for publication May 23, 2001.
