The  Subunit of the Sec61 Complex Facilitates Cotranslational Protein Transport and Interacts with the Signal Peptidase during Translocation
Kai-Uwe Kalies,* Tom A. Rapoport, and Enno Hartmann*
* Abteilung Biochemie II, Zentrum Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Georg-August-Universitat, 37073 Gottingen, Germany; and  Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
    Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Materials  and  Methods Results Discussion References
The Sec61 complex is the central component of the protein translocation apparatus of the ER membrane. We have addressed the role of the  subunit (Sec61) during cotranslational protein translocation. With a reconstituted system, we show that a Sec61 complex lacking Sec61 is essentially inactive when elongation and membrane targeting of a nascent chain occur at the same time. The translocation process is perturbed at a step where the nascent chain would be inserted into the translocation channel. However, if sufficient time is given for the interaction of the nascent polypeptide with the mutant Sec61 complex, translocation is almost normal. Thus Sec61 kinetically facilitates cotranslational translocation, but is not essential for it.

Using chemical cross-linking we show that Sec61 not only interacts with subunits of the Sec61 complex but also with the 25-kD subunit of the signal peptidase complex (SPC25), thus demonstrating for the first time a tight interaction between the SPC and the Sec61 complex. Interestingly, the cross-links between Sec61 and SPC25 and between Sec61 and Sec61 depend on the presence of membrane-bound ribosomes, suggesting that these interactions are induced when translocation is initiated. We propose that the SPC is transiently recruited to the translocation site, thus enhancing its activity.
    Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Materials  and  Methods Results Discussion References
IN higher eukaryotes, most proteins are transported across the ER membrane in a cotranslational manner. The translating ribosome binds tightly to the ER membrane (Connolly et al., 1989; Crowley et al., 1993, 1994; Kalies et al., 1994), and the growing nascent polypeptide chain is transferred directly from the channel in the ribosome into a channel in the membrane (Blobel and Dobberstein, 1975; Connolly et al., 1989; Simon and Blobel, 1991; Gorlich et al., 1992b; Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993).
The cotranslational translocation pathway in mammals can be reproduced with reconstituted proteoliposomes containing only three membrane protein components: the SRP receptor complex, the translocating chain-associating membrane (TRAM)1 protein, and the Sec61 complex (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993). The signal recognition particle (SRP) receptor is required to target a ribosome- nascent chain complex to the ER membrane. The function of the TRAM protein is still unclear; it is only required for the translocation of a subset of proteins (Gorlich et al., 1992a; Voigt et al., 1996). The Sec61 complex represents the essential core of the translocation machinery in the ER membrane. It consists of three subunits, an  subunit (Sec61) that spans the membrane 10 times, and  and  subunits (Sec61 and Sec61, respectively) that each span the membrane a single time.
The Sec61 complex is evolutionarily highly conserved and is proposed to carry out at least three different functions. First, it is the major constituent of the protein conducting membrane channel. Cross-linking experiments have shown that its  subunit is in continuous proximity of nascent polypeptide chains passing through the membrane (Mothes et al., 1994). Recent electron microscopic data demonstrate that the Sec61 complex can form cylindrical oligomers that presumably represent the channels (Hanein et al., 1996; Beckmann et al., 1997). Second, the Sec61 complex is tightly associated with membrane-bound ribosomes and is likely to be the ribosome receptor (Gorlich et al., 1992b; Kalies et al., 1994; Jungnickel and Rapoport, 1995). Third, the Sec61 complex is involved in a signal sequence recognition event that takes place inside the membrane (Jungnickel and Rapoport, 1995).
The role of the Sec61 complex subunits for its different functions is not yet clear. Whereas the presence of a multi-spanning  subunit in a channel-forming protein complex may not be surprising, the role of the two small single-spanning polypeptide chains remains mysterious. A particular enigma is the  subunit. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the simultaneous deletion of the  subunits of the two homologous Sec61 complexes (Sec61p and the Ssh1p complex) is not lethal; the cells only show a growth defect at elevated temperatures (Finke et al., 1996). Thus, despite the fact that the protein is evolutionarily highly conserved, it does not appear to be absolutely required in vivo. Posttranslational protein transport across yeast ER membranes in vitro is reduced, but not completely prevented, when the  subunits are lacking. At which point the transport process is inhibited, and whether the  subunits play any role in the cotranslational mode of protein transport has not yet been investigated.
The function of the  subunit of the Sec61 complex may not necessarily be restricted to the actual translocation process. The transport of proteins across the ER membrane must be intimately coupled to their modification and folding, and it seems possible that the  subunit could be involved in interactions between the translocation channel and modifying enzymes or chaperones. A physical association of these proteins with the channel may enhance the efficiency of their function. A good example is the signal peptidase, an abundant enzyme whose active site is in the lumen of the ER. Although it can cleave the signal peptide of even completed polypeptide chains, its efficiency is probably much higher when it can act on polypeptide chains that are just emerging from the translocation channel into the lumen of the ER. One may therefore predict its physical association with channel constituents. The signal peptidase complex is composed of five membrane protein subunits (Evans et al., 1986), two with an active site for enzymatic activity, one with a lumenal domain of unknown function, and two (12 and 25 kD) with cytosolic domains. The function of the latter is particularly unclear because they cannot contribute to the enzymatic activity on the lumenal side of the membrane, and are not essential for the viability of yeast cells (Lively and Walsh, 1983; Fang et al., 1996; Kalies and Hartmann, 1996; Mullins et al., 1996). They would be especially good candidates to serve as linkers to the translocation channel.
In the present paper, we have analyzed the role of the  subunit of the Sec61 complex in the cotranslational translocation pathway in mammals. Using a reconstituted system, we demonstrate that the  subunit kinetically facilitates, but is not essential for, cotranslational translocation. The protein does not play a role in the interaction of the ribosome with the Sec61 complex, but rather in the insertion of the nascent chain into the translocation site. Using a bifunctional cross-linker, we also provide evidence that it interacts specifically with the 25-kD subunit of the signal peptidase complex (SPC25), thus demonstrating for the first time a tight interactions between the SPC and the Sec61 complex. Cross-linking is only observed in the presence of membrane-bound ribosomes. These data thus suggest that, upon ribosome binding to the Sec61 complex, an interaction between the cytosolic domains of the Sec61 and SPC25 serves to recruit the signal peptidase complex to the translocation site. Together with the observation that cross-linking between the  and  subunits of the Sec61 complex is also dependent on translocation, these data provide first evidence for structural changes in the translocation apparatus upon initiation of cotranslational translocation.
    Materials and Methods Top Abstract Introduction Materials  and  Methods Results Discussion References Preparation of Reconstituted Proteoliposomes
Microsomes treated with puromycin and high salt (PK-RM) (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993) were solubilized at a concentration of 2 eq/ microl in SB (50 mM Hepes/KOH, pH 7.6, 15% glycerin, 400 mM potassium acetate, 10 mM magnesium acetate, and 10  microg/ml leupeptin, 2  microg/ml pepstatin, and 5  microg/ml chymostatin as protease inhibitors) containing 1.5% decylsucrose for 30 min on ice. After centrifugation for 10 min at 14,000 rpm in a microfuge, 0.7% deoxyBigChap was added to the supernatant. 500  microl detergent extract was mixed with 100  microl of an immunoaffinity resin that contained 0.2 mg/ml affinity-purified antibodies directed against the NH2 terminus of Sec61, covalently coupled to protein A-Sepharose (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993). The column was previously equilibrated with SB containing 1.5% decylsucrose and 0.7% deoxyBigChap. The incubation was done for 18 h in an overhead shaker in a cold room. Every 6 h the resin was replaced with a new one. The non-bound material was collected and proteoliposomes were produced by incubation with SM2-biobeads at 4 degrees C (Bio Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993). Proteoliposomes containing the purified Sec61 complex were prepared as described previously (Kalies et al., 1994).
The signal peptidase complex (SPC) was purified as reported (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993). Proteoliposomes were produced by mixing 20  microl of the SPC preparation (200 eq) with 20  microl of a phospholipid mixture (phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine, and phosphatidylinositol in a ratio of 100:25:3:12.5; total concentration 5 mg/ml). 40  microg SM2 biobeads equilibrated in SB were added and vesicles were prepared as described (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993).
Binding of Ribosomes to Proteoliposomes
The purification, radioactive labeling, and binding of ribosomes to reconstituted proteoliposomes were done as described (Kalies et al., 1994). The ribosome binding was carried out at 26 degrees C.
Cross-linking with Bis-maleimidohexane
A 25 mM stock solution of bis-maleimidohexane (BMH) in dimethylformamid was prepared. Microsomes or proteoliposomes were incubated with increasing amounts of BMH for 30 min at 0 degrees C in a cross-link buffer containing 50 mM Hepes/KOH, pH 7.6, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 250 mM sucrose, and protease inhibitors. The reaction was quenched by addition of 100 mM -mercaptoethanol and the samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting, using various antibodies.
Transcription, Translation, and Translocation
Transcripts coding for preprolactin were produced by in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase of the plasmid pGEMBP1. For full-length transcripts, the plasmid was cut with PstI and in the case of the transcripts coding for the 86-mer with PvuII.
Translation of the full-length protein was carried out in the wheat germ system in the presence of 40 nM SRP, [35S]methionine, and membranes at 26 degrees C for 30 min. After 15 min, 4  microM edeine was added to prevent further initiation. In a parallel experiment translation was started in the absence of membranes for 15 min at 26 degrees C. 4  microM edeine and membranes were then added. The samples were incubated on ice for 10 min followed by an incubation at 26 degrees C for additional 15 min. Half of the sample was precipitated with 15% TCA. The other half was treated with 0.5 mg/ml proteinase K for 30 min on ice, before precipitation with TCA. The pellets were washed with acetone and dissolved in SDS sample buffer. After SDS-PAGE, the gels were dried and analyzed in a quantitative manner with a PhosphorImager (Bas 1000; Fuji, Tokyo, Japan).
Translation of the 86-mer of preprolactin was done in the reticulocyte lysate system in the presence of [35S]methionine at 24 degrees C for 20 min. For the mock translation, the mRNA was omitted. 2 mM cycloheximide and 5 eq membranes were added to 300  microl translation mix and the incubation was continued at 0 degrees C for 10 min and at 25 degrees C for 5 min. After centrifugation in a microfuge at 14,000 rpm for 5 min the samples were layered on top of a sucrose cushion (400  microl of 50 mM Hepes/KOH, pH 7.6, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 500 mM sucrose) and were centrifuged at 75,000 rpm for 20 min (rotor TLA 100.3; Beckman Instruments, Inc., Fullerton, CA). Finally the pellets were resuspended in 65  microl cross-link buffer.
Immunoblotting, Immunoprecipitation, and Antibodies
Immunoblotting was carried out as described (Gorlich et al., 1992b). Before immunoprecipitation, the samples were denatured in SDS sample buffer omitting reducing reagents. The samples were then mixed with 10 vol of SB containing 1% Triton X-100, and incubated for 20 min on ice. Affinity-purified antibodies against Sec61 coupled to protein A-Sepharose were added. After shaking in a cold room for 3 h, the antibody resin was washed with 1% Triton X-100 in SB. Finally, the material bound to the column was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting.
Polyclonal antibodies directed against the following synthetic peptides were used: against the NH2 terminus of Sec61 (Gorlich et al., 1992b); against the COOH terminus of Sec61 (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993); against the position 137 to 150 of the SRP-receptor  (docking protein ); against the COOH terminus of the TRAM protein (Gorlich et al., 1992a); against the NH2 terminus of Sec61 (DQVMQFVEPSRQC); and against the COOH terminus of SPC25 (Kalies and Hartmann, 1996).
    Results Top Abstract Introduction Materials  and  Methods Results Discussion References Sec61 Facilitates Cotranslational Protein Translocation
We used reconstituted proteoliposomes, immunodepleted of the  subunit of the Sec61 complex, to investigate the role of the protein in cotranslational protein translocation. Mammalian PK-RM, were solubilized in a detergent mixture that leads to the dissociation of the Sec61 complex into its subunits. The detergent extract was incubated either with antibodies directed against Sec61 that had been immobilized on protein A-Sepharose or, to generate a mock-depleted extract, with protein A-Sepharose alone. The efficiency of immunodepletion was tested by Western blotting, using a radioactively labeled secondary antibody and a PhosphorImager. In a typical experiment, the depleted proteoliposomes contained  < 0.5% of the original amount of Sec61, whereas all other proteins tested remained almost unaffected (Fig. 1 A). The only exception was Sec61, the concentration of which was reduced to 50- 70% in the worst case. Apparently, under the conditions used, the  and the  subunits are not totally dissociated.
View larger version (38K):    Fig. 1.   Sec61 facilitates cotranslational protein translocation. (A) To produce proteoliposomes lacking Sec61 ribosome-free membranes (PK-RM) were solubilized under conditions where the Sec61 complex dissociates into its subunits. The detergent extract was immunodepleted with an antibody column directed against Sec61 or was incubated with protein A-Sepharose to generate a mock-depleted extract. After reconstitution the proteoliposomes and PK-RM were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting using a radioactively labeled secondary antibody and a PhosphorImager system for quantitation. (B) The membranes and proteoliposomes analyzed in A were tested for their competence to translocate polypeptides. Preprolactin mRNA was translated in the wheat germ system in the presence of SRP and microsomes or proteoliposomes, respectively, at 26 degrees C (lanes 2-8). In a parallel experiment translation was started in the absence of microsomes. After addition of membranes or proteoliposomes, respectively, the targeting reaction was carried out at 0 degrees C followed by an elongation at 26 degrees C (lanes 10-16). Half of the sample was treated with proteinase K to assay for material that is translocated into the vesicles and is therefore protected against the added protease. DP,  subunit of the SRP receptor; pPL, preprolactin; PL, prolactin.
We then tested the reconstituted proteoliposomes for their ability to translocate proteins synthesized in a wheat germ translation system. Microsomes (PK-RM) served as a control. Transcripts coding for full-length preprolactin were translated at 26 degrees C in the presence of microsomes or proteoliposomes, the concentration of which was normalized for their Sec61 content (Fig. 1 A). PK-RM and mock-depleted proteoliposomes had the same translocation activity (Fig. 1 B, lanes 6 and 7), whereas the depleted proteoliposomes were totally inactive (lane 8). In the absence of Sec61, processed prolactin was produced (Fig. 1 B, lane 4) that, however, was accessible to the action of proteinase K; it therefore presumably represents material generated by signal peptidase that was incorporated into the reconstituted membrane in the inverse orientation.
Since Sec61 is not essential in yeast, we wondered if the mammalian Sec61 complex lacking this component may show in vitro translocation activity under less stringent conditions than used before. We therefore performed the translocation reaction such that more time would be allowed for the membrane binding of the ribosome- nascent chain complex. Translation of the full-length transcript coding for preprolactin was initially carried out in the presence of SRP but absence of membranes. This leads to a translational arrest when the polypeptide chain reaches a length of ~70 residues. The membranes were then added at 0 degrees C, conditions that allow efficient membrane binding of the ribosome-nascent chain complexes but no chain elongation. The samples were then warmed up to 26 degrees C to continue translation and concomitant translocation. With this protocol, proteoliposomes lacking Sec61 were active in translocation, although their activity was lower by a factor of three compared with the wild-type complex (Fig. 1 B, lane 16 vs. lane 15). Thus, the depleted proteoliposomes are capable to translocate polypeptides if given enough time in the membrane targeting reaction. The results also indicate that the Sec61 complex lacking its  subunit has not been irreversibly denatured during the prolonged immunodepletion procedure. These data suggest that the ribosome-nascent chain complex was targeted to the membrane and thus brought in contact with the signal peptidase, but that a subsequent translocation step was perturbed. We also found that a fragment of preprolactin of 86 amino acids could be efficiently targeted to reconstituted proteoliposomes and reached a protease-protected state even if Sec61 was lacking (data not shown), supporting the conclusion that insertion of the nascent chain into the Sec61-depleted translocation site can occur if no chain elongation is going on.
It should be noted that in the absence of membranes, almost no full-length preprolactin could be observed (Fig. 1 B, lanes 1 and 9), indicating that under the conditions used, SRP produced a tight translational arrest. Both the microsomes and the two types of proteoliposomes were able to release the translational arrest (Fig. 1 B, lanes 2-4 and 10-12), indicating that this reaction is not dependent on the presence of Sec61.
Sec61 Is Not Required for Ribosome Binding
Our data suggested that in the absence of Sec61, the binding of the ribosome-nascent chain complex to the ER membrane is less efficient. This could be due to either a defect in the interaction of the mutated Sec61 complex with the ribosome, or to a perturbed insertion of the nascent chain into the translocation site. We therefore analyzed whether the  subunit plays a role in ribosome binding. Depleted and mock-depleted proteoliposomes were incubated at physiological salt concentrations with radioactively labeled ribosomes and increasing amounts of unlabeled ribosomes, both lacking nascent polypeptide chains. Under these conditions, the ribosomes interact mainly with the Sec61 complex (Kalies et al., 1994). To separate the unbound from the bound fraction, the membranes were floated in a sucrose gradient. Scatchard plot analysis was used to estimate the number of binding sites and the apparent dissociation constants (Fig. 2). Both the depleted and mock-depleted proteoliposomes were found to bind ribosomes with approximately the same binding constant. Also, the number of binding sites was about the same. The measured parameters are in good agreement with published data for the binding of ribosomes to PK-RM and proteoliposomes (Kalies et al., 1994), although the dissociation constants seem to be somewhat higher at 26 degrees  than at 0 degrees C. Thus, steps other than the interaction between SRP and its membrane receptor or the binding of ribosomes to the Sec61 complex must be responsible for the less efficient insertion of the nascent polypeptide chains into proteoliposomes lacking Sec61.
View larger version (20K):    Fig. 2.   Binding of ribosomes to reconstituted proteoliposomes. Sec61- and mock-depleted proteoliposomes were incubated with radioactively labeled ribosomes and increasing amounts of unlabeled ribosomes at physiological salt concentrations and 26 degrees C. To separate the bound from the unbound fraction the samples were submitted to flotation in a sucrose gradient. The number of binding sites and the apparent dissociation constants were estimated by Scatchard plot analysis. Kd, dissociation constant; eq, membrane equivalant (Walter and Blobel, 1983).
Sec61 Interacts with the 25-kD Subunit of the Signal Peptidase Complex
To further analyze the function of Sec61, we investigated its molecular environment in the membrane by chemical cross-linking. Rough microsomes (RM) were treated with increasing amounts of BMH, a bifunctional cross-linking reagent that reacts with sulfhydryl (SH) groups. The proteins were subsequently separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies against Sec61 (Fig. 3, lanes 2-6). Three cross-linked products were detected with the antibodies (Fig. 3, lanes 2-6 vs. lane 1). The apparent molecular weights of the cross-linked proteins were estimated to be 12, 23, and 38 kD, assuming an apparent molecular weight for Sec61 of 13 kD.
View larger version (36K):    Fig. 3.   Analysis of the environment of Sec61 by chemical cross-linking. RM were treated with increasing amounts of bis-maleimidohexane (BMH) and were subsequently analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting using antibodies directed against the  subunit of the Sec61 complex (lanes 1-6). To identify the cross-linked polypeptides, RM were treated with BMH as indicated. The samples were subsequently immunoprecipitated under denaturing conditions with an anti-Sec61 column. The precipitated material was analyzed by Western blotting using antibodies directed against Sec61 (lanes 7-10), Sec61 (lanes 11-14) or the 25-kD subunit of the signal peptidase complex (SPC25) (lanes 15-18), respectively. Lanes 1, 7, 11, and 15 show the results for untreated RM.
To identify the cross-linked proteins, microsomes were treated with two different concentrations of BMH and dissolved in SDS-containing buffer to dissociate noncovalent chemical bonds. The extract was subjected to immunoprecipitation with Sec61 antibodies and the precipitated material was analyzed by Western blotting using different antibodies. Fig. 3 shows the immunoblots with antibodies directed against Sec61 (Fig. 3, lanes 7-10), Sec61 (Fig. 3, lanes 11-14) and SPC25 (lanes 15-18). The product containing the 38-kD protein could be immunoprecipitated with Sec61 antibodies (Fig. 3, lane 10) and was recognized by the Sec61 antibody (lane 14), indicating that it is generated by cross-linking between the  and  subunits of the Sec61 complex. The product containing a protein of ~23 kD could be immunoprecipitated with Sec61 antibodies (Fig. 3, lane 9) and reacted with antibodies against SPC25 (lane 17) and is thus generated by cross-linking between these two proteins. Neither Sec61 nor SPC25 were coprecipitated with Sec61 if BMH was omitted (Fig. 3, lanes 12 and 16), and both antibodies recognized single bands in untreated RM (lanes 11 and 15).
The product containing the protein of ~12 kD did not react with any of the antibodies tested. Considering its size, we suspected that it may represent a product generated by cross-linking of two  subunits of the Sec61 complex. To test this assumption, purified Sec61 complex was reconstituted into proteoliposomes and subjected to cross-linking with BMH. When analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting with Sec61 antibodies, a cross-linked product containing a 12-kD protein was again observed (Fig. 4 A, lanes 10-12), indicating that the cross-linking partner is indeed a constituent of the Sec61 complex. The smaller cross-linked product in Fig. 4 A, lanes 11 and 12 (marked with an asterisk) is probably generated by cross-linking between Sec61 and Sec61, the smallest subunit of the Sec61 complex. The appearance of this cross-linked product in native microsomes was variable among different experiments.
View larger version (50K):    Fig. 4.   Sec61 is involved in ribosome-dependent structural changes of the translocation site. Rough microsomes (RM), ribosome-free membranes (PK-RM), proteoliposomes produced from an unfractionated detergent extract of PK-RM (total), and proteoliposomes containing the purified Sec61 complex (Sec61p) or the purified signal peptidase complex (SPC), respectively, were treated with BMH as indicated. After SDS-PAGE the samples were analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies against Sec61 (A) or SPC25 (B). The position of a probable cross-link between Sec61 and Sec61 is marked by an asterisk.
Ribosome-dependent Structural Changes of the Translocation Site
We were concerned that the membrane-bound ribosomes may prevent full access of the bifunctional cross-linker to Sec61 so that only a subset of its interacting partners could be detected. However, to our surprise, when PK-RM were used in cross-linking experiments, not only were no additional cross-links observed, but those between Sec61 and Sec61 and between Sec61 and SPC25 could no longer be seen (Fig. 4 A, lanes 4-6). Treatment of RM with high salt or puromycin alone did not change these cross-links (data not shown), suggesting that their disappearance requires the dissociation of the ribosomes into subunits. In agreement with this assumption, proteoliposomes reconstituted from a crude detergent extract of microsomes or proteoliposomes containing only the purified Sec61 complex, which both lack membrane-bound ribosomes, also did not give these cross-links (Fig. 4 A, lanes 7-12).
A similar conclusion could be drawn when the cross-linking reaction was analyzed with SPC25 antibodies (Fig. 4 B). With RM two cross-linked products were seen, one of ~36 kD between SPC25 and Sec61, and another of ~46 kD (Fig. 4 B, lane 2 vs. lane 1). With PK-RM or with proteoliposomes reconstituted from a crude detergent extract, the adduct of SPC25 and Sec61 was no longer observed (Fig. 4 B, lanes 4-6 and lanes 7-9, respectively), whereas the 46-kD cross-linked product remained unchanged. The latter was also observed with proteoliposomes containing only the purified signal peptidase complex (Fig. 4 B, lane 11). Two SPC subunits, the nonglycosylated SPC25 and the glycoprotein SPC22/23 carry SH groups and have an appropriate molecular weight to produce this 46-kD cross-link with SPC25. As the molecular weight of the cross-linked product did not change after treatment with N-glycosidase F (data not shown), we conclude that it consists of two SPC25.
To exclude that the high salt treatment during the preparation of PK-RM was responsible for the structural alterations identified, ribosomes were detached from the membrane by an independent method. When the reaction with BMH was performed in the presence of 10 mM EDTA under low salt conditions, the cross-link between Sec61 and Sec61 and that between Sec61 and SPC25 could not be seen anymore (Fig. 5, lanes 5 and 4 vs. lanes 2 and 3). However, the homotypic cross-link between two Sec61 remained unchanged, indicating that the EDTA did not interfere with the reactivity of the BMH. It should be noted that the extent to which the cross-linking intensity was reduced varied in different experiments.
View larger version (60K):    Fig. 5.   Structural changes of the translocation site in EDTA-treated microsomes. RM were incubated with 10 mM EDTA before BMH was added as indicated. The samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting with anti-Sec61 antibodies.
If the ribosome-dependent alteration of the cross-link pattern has a real physiological significance it should be possible to reproduce the cross-link between Sec61 and Sec61 and that between Sec61 and SPC25 by a retargeting of ribosomes carrying nascent polypeptide chains at ribosome free membranes. Ribosome-nascent chain complexes were produced by an in vitro translation of truncated mRNA coding for the first 86 amino acids of preprolactin (86-mer). Ribosome-free membranes (PK-RM) were then added to the translation mix (Fig. 6 A, lanes 4-6). As controls PK-RM and RM were incubated with a translation mix that did not contain any preprolactin mRNA (Fig. 6 A, lanes 1-3 and lanes 7-9). After isolation of the membranes aliquots of each sample were treated with different amounts of BMH. The samples were analyzed by Western blotting with Sec61 antibodies using enhanced chemiluminescence as a detection system (Fig. 6 A) or by quantitative immunoblotting using radioactively labeled secondary antibodies and a PhosphorImager (Fig. 6 B). The quantitation (Fig. 6 B) shows that the incubation of PK-RM with ribosome-nascent chain complexes led to a clear restimulation of the cross-link intensity between Sec61 and Sec61 and between Sec61 and SPC25. Similar results were obtained if EDTA-treated membranes were analyzed (data not shown).
View larger version (47K):    Fig. 6.   Structural changes of the translocation site are induced by the targeting of ribosomes carrying the preprolactin 86-mer (pPl 86mer). (A) Translation was carried out in the reticulocyte lysate system in the presence (lanes 4-6) or absence (lanes 1-3 and 7-9) of mRNA coding for the pPl 86-mer. After addition of PK-RM (lanes 1-6) or rough microsomes (lanes 7-9), respectively, the targeting reaction was carried out at 0 degrees C followed by an incubation at 26 degrees C. The membranes were collected by a centrifugation through a sucrose cushion, separated into three aliquots and treated with bis-maleimidohexane (BMH) as indicated. The samples were analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies against Sec61 using as a detection system enhanced chemiluminescence (A) or radioactively labeled secondary antibodies (B), respectively. The unknown cross-link marked with an asterisk was not observed in other experiments. (B) A PhosphorImager system was used for quantitation of the cross-linking intensities. The cross-linking intensities obtained for RM were defined as 100%.
Taken together, these data provide evidence that the  subunit of the Sec61 complex is involved in ribosome- dependent conformational changes of the translocation channel and that it specifically interacts with the signal peptidase during cotranslational translocation.
    Discussion Top Abstract Introduction Materials  and  Methods Results Discussion References
In this paper, we have studied the role of the  subunit of the Sec61 complex during cotranslational protein translocation into the mammalian ER. We have found that the translocation competence of reconstituted proteoliposomes immunodepleted of Sec61 is greatly reduced when tested under conditions in which membrane targeting and translation occur at the same time. However, if ribosomes carrying short nascent chains are first targeted to the membrane before translation is continued, i.e., if enough time is given for their membrane insertion, the depleted proteoliposomes are only marginally reduced in their activity. These results can be explained by the assumption that elongation of a nascent chain and its insertion into the translocation channel are kinetically competing processes: if the membrane insertion is too slow, elongation of the nascent chain would continue in the cytosol and its folding would prevent a later interaction of the signal sequence with the translocation apparatus. We therefore infer that the  subunit is required for a rapid insertion of the ribosome-bound nascent chain into the translocation sites in the ER membrane. The observation that the  subunit is not essential is in agreement with the fact that the deletion of the two  subunits in yeast cells is not lethal and leads to a growth phenotype only at elevated temperatures. Since microsomes isolated from the mutant had a reduced activity for posttranslational protein transport, these and the present results indicate that the  subunit plays a role in both pathways, but is not absolutely required in either one.
As the cotranslational translocation process is known in much detail, we have been able to analyze the effect of Sec61 depletion on the various steps. One of the first steps is the interaction of the ribosome-nascent chain- SRP complex with the SRP receptor in the membrane that leads to the release of the translational arrest exerted by SRP. This reaction was not perturbed by the depletion of Sec61, although previous data showed that, for optimal release, both the SRP receptor and the Sec61 complex are required (Gorlich and Rapoport, 1993). We therefore conclude that the  subunit is not essential for this activity of the Sec61 complex. The binding of ribosomes to the ER membrane was also not affected by the absence of Sec61. Both the number of binding sites and the dissociation constant remained unchanged and were almost identical to the values determined for the reconstituted, purified wild-type Sec61 complex. These results are consistent with the observation that proteolytic degradation of the cytosolic domain of Sec61 in microsomes does not prevent the binding of ribosomes (Kalies et al., 1994). Taken together, our results indicate that even in the absence of Sec61, efficient release of the SRP arrest and binding of the ribosome-nascent chain complex to the Sec61 complex can occur. This conclusion is further supported by the observation that the membrane targeted nascent chains undergo signal peptide cleavage by signal peptidase located in the wrong orientation in the reconstituted membrane. It therefore appears that a step subsequent to membrane targeting, most likely the step in which the nascent chain is inserted into the Sec61 channel, is perturbed in the absence of the  subunit. Structural changes in the Sec61 channel, which may be required for its opening (Crowley et al., 1994; Jungnickel and Rapoport, 1995), may occur with a reduced rate.
To further analyze the function of Sec61, we have probed its molecular environment in ER membranes by cross-linking. A bifunctional cross-linker was used that reacts specifically with SH groups and therefore can be expected to give a relative simple cross-linking pattern. As predicted, in rough microsomes Sec61 was found in close proximity to the  subunit of the Sec61 complex. We also found a cross-linked product consisting of two Sec61 molecules, perhaps explained by the occurrence of oligomers of the trimeric Sec61 complex in microsomes (Hanein et al., 1996). Most interestingly, however, a specific cross-linked product containing SPC25 was observed. Conversely, when the cross-linking partners of SPC25 were analyzed, the only partner outside the signal peptidase complex was found to be Sec61. Remarkably, 70% of SPC25 could be cross-linked to Sec61. We therefore believe that the cross-link between the two proteins indicates their specific interaction. These data provide the first evidence that the signal peptidase physically contacts the protein conducting channel in the membrane. The cross-linking between Sec61 and SPC25 has likely occurred between their cytosolic domains since the only cysteine in Sec61 is in its NH2 terminus and two appropriately located cysteines exist in the NH2-terminal domain of SPC25 (Fig. 7), previously shown to be cytosolic (Kalies and Hartmann, 1996). SPC25 has almost no amino acid residues in the lumen of the ER where the active site of the signal peptidase resides (Fig. 7) and its function was therefore obscure. On the basis of our data, we propose that it is involved in an interaction with the Sec61 complex to bring the enzyme close to the translocating polypeptide substrate. However, sequestration in the translocation site may not be absolutely essential for its function because the signal peptidase complex is very abundant and can probably reach its substrates by mere diffusion in the plane of the membrane, explaining why neither SPC25 nor Sec61 are essential for the viability of yeast cells.
View larger version (20K):    Fig. 7.   Membrane topology of the signal peptidase complex and the Sec61 complex. The topologies of all subunits are schematically illustrated. The dark boxes indicate hydrophobic segments or membrane spanning segments, respectively. SPC22/23 is drawn in the glycosylated form. The position of SH-groups is marked by white circles.
Further evidence for our conjecture that Sec61 may be involved in recruiting the signal peptidase complex to the translocation site comes from cross-linking experiments in which ribosome-stripped membranes were used. These membranes gave many cross-link-reduced cross-links between Sec61 and SPC25. After retargeting of ribosome-nascent chain complexes at almost ribosome-free membranes, the cross-linking between both proteins was increased, suggesting that their interaction is induced when translocation is initiated by ribosome binding. The cross-linking between Sec61 and Sec61 was also dependent on the presence of membrane-bound ribosomes. Both effects required the dissociation of the ribosome, and not merely the release of the nascent chain from the ribosome, since they occurred with puromycin at high but not at low salt concentrations. The changes in cross-linking pattern upon ribosome removal or retargeting of ribosome-nascent chain complexes could be caused by conformational alterations in an assembled complex or by dissociation of an assembly into subcomplexes. In any case, they provide first evidence for structural changes among known components of the translocation apparatus induced by the onset of cotranslational translocation.
    Footnotes
Received for publication 11 April 1997 and in revised form 10 February 1998.
   The work was supported by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.    Address all correspondence to Dr. E. Hartmann, Abteilung Biochemie II, Zentrum Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Georg-August-Universitat, Gossler Strasse 12 d, 37073 Gottingen, Germany. Tel.: (49) (551) 395973. Fax: (49) (30) 94063363. 
We thank A. Wittstruck and B. Nentwig for technical help.
    Abbreviations used in this paper
BMH, bis-maleimidohexane; PK-RM, puromycin and high salt-treated rough microsomes; RM, rough microsomes; SPC, signal peptidase complex; SPC25, the 25-kD subunit of the signal peptidase complex; SRP, signal recognition particle; TRAM, translocating chain-associating membrane.
    References Top Abstract Introduction Materials  and  Methods Results Discussion References 1. Beckmann, R., D. Bubeck, R. Grassucci, P. Penczek, A. Verschoor, G. Blobel, and J. Frank. 1997. Alignment of conduits for the nascent chain in the ribosome-Sec61 complex. Science. 278: 2123-2126 [Abstract/Free Full Text]. 2. Blobel, G., and B. Dobberstein. 1975. Transfer of proteins across membranes. I. Presence of proteolytically processed and unprocessed nascent immunoglobulin light chains on membrane-bound ribosomes of murine myeloma. J. Cell Biol. 67: 835-851 [Abstract]. 3. Connolly, T., P. Collins, and R. Gilmore. 1989. Access of proteinase K to partially translocated nascent polypeptides in intact and detergent-solubilized membranes. J. Cell Biol. 108: 299-307 [Abstract]. 4. Crowley, K.S., G.D. Reinhart, and A.E. Johnson. 1993. The signal sequence moves through a ribosomal tunnel into a noncytoplasmic aqueous environment at the ER membrane early in translocation. Cell. 73: 1101-1115 5. Crowley, K.S., S.R. Liao, V.E. Worrell, G.D. Reinhart, and A.E. Johnson. 1994. Secretory proteins move through the endoplasmic reticulum membrane via an aqueous, gated pore. Cell. 78: 461-471 6. Evans, E.A., R. Gilmore, and G. Blobel. 1986. Purification of microsomal signal peptidase as a complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 83: 581-585 [Abstract]. 7. Fang, H., S. Panzner, C. Mullins, E. Hartmann, and N. Green. 1996. The homologue of mammalian SPC12 is important for efficient signal peptidase activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 16460-16465 [Abstract/Free Full Text]. 8. Finke, K., K. Plath, S. Panzner, S. Prehn, T.A. Rapoport, E. Hartmann, and T. Sommer. 1996. A second trimeric complex containing homologs of the Sec61 complex functions in protein transport across the ER membrane of S. cerevisiae. EMBO (Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.) J. 15: 1482-1494 [Abstract]. 9. Gorlich, D., and T.A. Rapoport. 1993. Protein translocation into proteoliposomes reconstituted from purified components of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Cell. 75: 615-630 10. Gorlich, D., E. Hartmann, S. Prehn, and T.A. Rapoport. 1992a. A protein of the endoplasmic reticulum involved early in polypeptide translocation. Nature 357: 47-52 11. Gorlich, D., S. Prehn, E. Hartmann, K.-U. Kalies, and T.A. Rapoport. 1992b. A mammalian homolog of Sec61p and Secyp is associated with ribosomes and nascent polypeptides during translocation. Cell. 71: 489-503 12. Hanein, D., K.E.S. Matlack, B. Jungnickel, K. Plath, K.-U. Kalies, K.R. Miller, T.A. Rapoport, and C.W. Akey. 1996. Oligomeric rings of the Sec61p complex induced by ligands required for protein translocation. Cell. 87: 721-732 13. Jungnickel, B., and T.A. Rapoport. 1995. A posttargeting signal sequence recognition event in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Cell. 82: 261-270 14. Kalies, K.-U., and E. Hartmann. 1996. Membrane topology of the 12- and the 25-kDa subunit of the mammalian signal peptidase complex. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 3925-3929 [Abstract/Free Full Text]. 15. Kalies, K.-U., D. Gorlich, and T.A. Rapoport. 1994. Binding of ribosomes to the rough endoplasmic reticulum mediated by the sec61p-complex. J. Cell Biol. 126: 925-934 [Abstract]. 16. Lively, M.O., and K.A. Walsh. 1983. Hen oviduct signal peptidase is an integral membrane protein. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 9488-9495 [Abstract/Free Full Text]. 17. Mothes, W., S. Prehn, and T.A. Rapoport. 1994. Systematic probing of the environment of a translocating secretory protein during translocation through the ER membrane. EMBO (Eur. Mol. Biol. Organ.) J. 13: 3937-3982 . 18. Mullins, C., H.-A. Meyer, E. Hartmann, N. Green, and H. Fang. 1996. Structurally related Spc1p and Spc2p of yeast signal peptidase complex are functionally distinct. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 29094-29099 [Abstract/Free Full Text]. 19. Simon, S.M., and G. Blobel. 1991. A protein-conducting channel in the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell. 65: 371-380 20. Voigt, S., B. Jungnickel, E. Hartmann, and T.A. Rapoport. 1996. Signal sequence-dependent function of the TRAM protein during early phases of protein transport across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. J. Cell Biol. 134: 25-35 [Abstract]. 21. Walter, P., and G. Blobel. 1983. Preparation of microsomal membranes for cotranslational protein translocation. Methods Enzymol 96: 84-93 Copyright   1998 by The Rockefeller University Press. 0021-9525/98/05/887/08 $2.00
