Cystic fibrosis, gene therapy, and lung inflammation: for better or worse? Lisa M. Schwiebert
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0005
THE STUDY by van Heeckeren and colleagues, one of the current articles in focus (Ref. 20, see p. L717 in this issue), addresses the question of whether adenoviral delivery of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) to the cystic fibrosis airways attenuates inflammation and mortality associated with a chronic bacterial infection. This is an intriguing question because adenoviral vectors themselves can invoke a substantial immune response that prohibits their repeated administration to the lung (2). In their article, van Heeckeren and coworkers report that, within the infected cystic fibrosis lung, CFTR expression and/or adenoviral vector-induced inflammation yields a significant survival advantage. This promising observation may have profound implications for the utility of adenoviral vectors in the gene therapy treatment of cystic fibrosis.
CFTR mutations and cystic fibrosis lung pathophysiology. Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal recessive disorder in the Caucasian population, with a frequency of 1 in 2,500 live births. It is caused by defective function of the cftr gene product (14), which encodes a 170- to 180-kDa protein that functions as a cAMP-regulated chloride channel. The CFTR protein is expressed normally in those tissues affected in cystic fibrosis, including airway submucosal glands and airway epithelial cells. The cystic fibrosis respiratory disease phenotype includes thick mucus secretion and bacterial colonization of the lung with a select few bacterial pathogens, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa (13). Repeated P. aeruginosa infections compounded by an inability to clear this organism result in a profound neutrophil migration into the airways and secretion of a variety of inflammatory mediators, including neutrophil elastase, reactive oxygen species, and inflammatory cytokines, which cause irreversible damage to the airways and gas-exchange components.
Cystic fibrosis and adenoviral vector-mediated gene therapy. Correction of the defective cftr gene in vivo has long been the holy grail of the cystic fibrosis research community. The use of adenoviral vectors in this pursuit has been problematic (reviewed in Ref. 2). In early clinical trials, the administration of adenoviral vectors encoding CFTR demonstrated great promise, with transient correction of chloride transport defects. Subsequent studies, however, failed to repeat this initial finding and, moreover, revealed that adenoviral vector-mediated delivery of CFTR to the cystic fibrosis airways was limited by the local immune response associated with multiple vector administrations. Similarly, van Heeckeren and colleagues (19) reported previously that P. aeruginosa-induced bronchopulmonary inflammation also limited the efficacy of adenoviral vector-mediated gene transfer. Despite this limitation, several studies suggest that the extent of CFTR correction required for a normal lung phenotype may be quite low (2), thereby validating the use of adenoviral vectors in cystic fibrosis gene therapy.
Until the current study by van Heeckeren et al. (20), the impact of adenoviral vector-mediated gene therapy had not been examined in the context of a cystic fibrosis lung chronically infected with bacteria (19). In this ambitious study by van Heeckeren and coworkers (20), the authors determined whether CFTR delivery improved the outcome of a cystic fibrosis murine model infected with P. aeruginosa. Specifically, the authors reported that gut-corrected cystic fibrosis mice treated with an adenoviral vector encoding CFTR and inoculated with P. aeruginosa-laden agarose beads exhibited a significantly greater cumulative 10-day survival compared with sucrose controls; survival of empty vector controls, however, was not significantly different. Importantly, these authors observed that there were no differences between mice receiving the CFTR vector or controls with regard to the extent of lung inflammation. From these data, the authors concluded that the observed survival advantage in mice receiving adenoviral delivery of CFTR to the cystic fibrosis lung may be due to CFTR expression and/or proinflammatory effects of the adenoviral vector.
CFTR expression vs. adenoviral vector-induced inflammation. Because cumulative 10-day survival was not significantly different between mice receiving CFTR-encoding vectors vs. empty vector controls, it is likely that CFTR expression plays a small role in this response. As the authors note (20), it is possible that the administration of an adenoviral vector may have induced a protective immune response that improved cumulative survival. In support of this possibility, the authors observed a persistent lung lymphocytosis in response to adenoviral vector administration; this response was further enhanced upon challenge with P. aeruginosa-laden agarose beads. Interestingly, the authors did not observe increased bacterial killing in mice treated with either the CFTR-encoding adenoviral vector or the empty vector control.
Early studies by Markham and coworkers (8, 12) suggest that T cell-mediated immune responses are protective against P. aeruginosa infections. For example, these authors have shown that adoptive transfer of T cells from mice immunized with P. aeruginosa to granulocytopenic mice resulted in nearly 100% survival upon challenge with P. aeruginosa (12). Similar findings have been reported by others (3). Despite these reports, the exact nature of T cell-mediated immunity in P. aeruginosa infections remains unclear. Hoiby and colleagues have reported that, in a rat model of P. aeruginosa pnuemonia (4) and in cystic fibrosis patients (11), chronic P. aeruginosa infection induces a T helper type 2 (Th2)-like response. Th2 responses are characterized by the production of IL-4 and IL-5 and are important in the generation of humoral immunity. These results are further supported by their observation that chronic P. aeruginosa lung infection is more severe in a Th2 responding mouse strain (BALB/c) (10). With regard to protective T cell immunity, Hoiby and coworkers (4, 5, 9) have demonstrated that induction of a Th1-dominated cytokine response improves the outcome of chronic P. aeruginosa lung infection. Th1 responses are characterized by the production of IFN- and are instrumental in the generation of cell-mediated immunity. Interestingly, previous studies have shown that adenoviral vector administration can trigger a Th1 response in the lungs of mice (18, 21) and humans (1). In light of these findings, it is tempting to conclude that the improved cumulative survival observed in the van Heeckeren study (20) is a function of an adenovirus-induced Th1 response; however, this conclusion may be too simplistic.
Several recent studies call into question the beneficial nature of a Th1 response in P. aeruginosa infections. Reports examining the role of the virulence factor alginate (17) and the quorum-sensing molecule N-(3-oxododecanoyl)homoserine lactone (16) in P. aeruginosa pathogenicity indicate that each of these factors induces a Th1-predominated immune response that may contribute to P. aeruginosa pathogenesis. Moreover, Schultz and colleagues (15) have reported recently that, in a rat model of P. aeruginosa pneumonia, endogenous IFN- impairs bacterial clearance and host defense. Clearly, differences in the strain of P. aeruginosa (nonmucoid vs. mucoid), type of infection (acute vs. chronic), route of administration, and model system of analysis must be taken into account when considering the role of Th1/Th2 responses in P. aeruginosa infections.
Despite the ongoing debate of T cell responses in P. aeruginosa infections, it should be noted that these studies were performed in non-cystic fibrosis model systems. Because recent evidence indicates that T cell responses may be dysregulated in cystic fibrosis (6, 7), such studies need to be performed in the context of the cystic fibrosis lung. This is underscored by the van Heeckeren study (20), which suggests that adenoviral vector-induced inflammation may promote survival of cystic fibrosis mice during a chronic P. aeruginosa infection. As with all well-conceived studies, this study precipitates a number of unanswered questions. For example, in the absence of P. aeruginosa infection, does the nature of the inflammatory response differ between mice receiving an adenoviral vector encoding CFTR vs. empty vector controls? Does CFTR play a role in the T cell immune responses triggered by P. aeruginosa infection? How does the hyperimmune response of the cystic fibrosis lung contribute to adenoviral vector- or P. aeruginosa-mediated inflammation? Future studies examining immune responses triggered upon adenoviral vector administration of the P. aeruginosa-infected cystic fibrosis airways should provide new and important information regarding the utility of adenoviral vectors in cystic fibrosis-related gene therapy.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   GRANTS
This work was supported by a grant from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (to L. M. Schwiebert).
   FOOTNOTES   Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: L. M. Schwiebert, Dept. of Physiology and Biophysics, Univ. of Alabama at Birmingham, MCLM 966, 1918 Univ. Blvd., Birmingham, AL 35294-0005 (E-mail: lschwieb{at}uab.edu' + u + '@' + d + ''//-->).
   REFERENCES TOP REFERENCES   Chirmule N, Propert KJ, Magosin SA, Qian Y, Qian R, and Wilson JM. Immune responses to adenovirus and adeno-associated virus in humans. Gene Ther 6: 1574-1583, 1999.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Driskell RA and Engelhardt JF. Current status of gene therapy for inherited lung diseases. Annu Rev Physiol 65: 585-612, 2003.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Dunkley ML, Clancy RL, and Cripps AW. A role of CD4+ T cells from orally immunized rats in enhanced clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from the lung. Immunology 83: 362-369, 1994.[ISI][Medline] Johansen HK, Hougen HP, Cryz SJ, Rygaard J, and Hoiby N. Vaccination promotes Th1-like inflammation and survival in chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia in rats. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 152: 1337-1346, 1995.[Abstract] Johansen HK, Hougen HP, Rygaard J, and Hoiby N. Interferon- treatment decreases the inflammatory response in chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia in rats. Clin Exp Immunol 103: 212-218, 1996.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Knutsen AP, Slavin RG, Roodman ST, Mueller KR, and Marino NL. Decreased helper T cell function in patients with cystic fibrosis. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol 85: 847-850, 1988. Lahat N, Rivlin J, and Iancu TC. Functional immunoregulatory T cell function in patients with cystic fibrosis. J Clin Immunol 9: 287-295, 1989.[ISI][Medline] Markham RB and Powderly WG. Exposure of mice to live Pseudomonas aeruginosa generates protective cell-mediated immunity in the absence of an antibody response. J Immunol 140: 2039-2045, 1988.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Moser C, Jensen PO, Kobayashi O, Hougen HP, Song Z, Rygaard J, Kharazmi A, and Hoiby N. Improved outcome of chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection is associated with induction of a Th1-dominated cytokine response. Clin Exp Immunol 127: 206-213, 2002.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Moser C, Johansen HK, Song Z, Hougen HP, Rygaard J, and Hoiby N. Chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection is more severe in Th2 responding BALB/c mice compared to Th1 responding C3H/HeN mice. APMIS 105: 838-842, 1997.[ISI][Medline] Moser C, Kjaergaard S, Pressler T, Kharazmi A, Koch C, and Hoiby N. The immune response to chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection in cystic fibrosis patients is predominantly of the Th2 type. APMIS 108: 329-335, 2000.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Powderly WG, Pier GB, and Markham RB. T lymphocyte-mediated protection against Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in granulocytopenic mice. J Clin Invest 78: 375-380, 1986.[ISI][Medline] Ratjen F and Doring G. Cystic fibrosis. Lancet 361: 681-689, 2003.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Riordan JR, Rommens JM, Kerem B, Alon N, Rozmahel R, Grzelczak Z, Zielenski J, Lok S, Plavsic N, and Chou JL. Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene: cloning and characterization of complementary DNA. Science 245: 1066-1073, 1989. [Corrigendum. Science 245: September 1989, p. 1437.][ISI][Medline] Schultz MJ, Rijneveld AW, Speelman P, van Deventer SJ, and van der Poll T. Endogenous interferon- impairs bacterial clearance from lungs during Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia. Eur Cytokine Netw 12: 39-44, 2001.[ISI][Medline] Smith RS, Harris SG, Phipps R, and Iglewski B. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum-sensing molecule N-(3-oxododecanoyl)homoserine lactone contributes to virulence and induces inflammation in vivo. J Bacteriol 184: 1132-1139, 2002.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Song Z, Wu H, Ciofu O, Kong KF, Hoiby N, Rygaard J, Kharazmi A, and Mathee K. Pseudomonas aeruginosa alginate is refractory to Th1 immune response and impedes host immune clearance in a mouse model of acute lung infection. J Med Microbiol 52: 731-740, 2003.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Van Ginkel FW, McGhee JR, Chongguang L, Simecka JW, Yamamoto M, Frizzell RA, Sorscher EJ, Kiyono H, and Pascual DW. Adenoviral gene delivery elicits distinct pulmonary-associated T helper cell responses to the vector and to its transgene. J Immunol 159: 685-693, 1997.[Abstract] Van Heeckeren A, Ferkol T, and Tosi M. Effects of bronchopulmonary inflammation induced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa on adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to airway epithelial cells in mice. Gene Ther 5: 345-351, 1998.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Van Heeckeren AM, Scaria A, Schluchter MD, Ferkol TW, Wadsworth S, and Davis PB. Delivery of CFTR by adenoviral vector to cystic fibrosis mouse lung in a model of chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 286: L717-L726, 2004. Yang Y, Li Q, Ertl HC, and Wilson JM. Cellular and humoral immune responses to viral antigens create barriers to lung-directed gene therapy with recombinant adenoviruses. J Virol 69: 2004-2015, 1995.[Abstract] This Article Full Text (PDF) Alert me when this article is cited Alert me if a correction is posted Citation Map Services Email this article to a friend Similar articles in this journal Similar articles in ISI Web of Science Similar articles in PubMed Alert me to new issues of the journal Download to citation manager Search for citing articles in: ISI Web of Science (3) Google Scholar Articles by Schwiebert, L. M. Articles citing this Article PubMed PubMed Citation Articles by Schwiebert, L. M.
HOME HELP FEEDBACK SUBSCRIPTIONS ARCHIVE SEARCH TABLE OF CONTENTS Visit Other APS Journals Online Copyright   2004 by the American Physiological Society.
