Functional Implications of the Presenilin Dimerization RECONSTITUTION OF -SECRETASE ACTIVITY BY ASSEMBLY OF A CATALYTIC SITE AT THE DIMER INTERFACE OF TWO CATALYTICALLY INACTIVE PRESENILINS* Sara Cervantes, Carlos A. Saura ||, Esther Pomares, Roser Gonzalez-Duarte, and Gemma Marfany**
From the Departament de Genetica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Avda. Diagonal 645, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain and the  Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
Received for publication, April 30, 2004 , and in revised form, June 22, 2004.
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Presenilins are the catalytic components of -secretase, an intramembrane-cleaving protease whose substrates include -amyloid precursor protein (APP) and the Notch receptors. These type I transmembrane proteins undergo two distinct presenilin-dependent cleavages within the transmembrane region, which result in the production of A and APP intracellular domain (from APP) and the Notch intracellular domain signaling peptide. Most cases of familial Alzheimer's disease are caused by presenilin mutations, which are scattered throughout the coding sequence. Although the underlying molecular mechanism is not yet known, the familial Alzheimer's disease mutations produce a shift in the ratio of the long and short forms of the A peptide generated by the -secretase. We and others have previously shown that presenilin homodimerizes and suggested that a presenilin dimer is at the catalytic core of -secretase. Here, we demonstrate that presenilin transmembrane domains contribute to the formation of the dimer. In-frame substitution of the hydrophilic loop 1, located between transmembranes I and II, which modulates the interactions within the N-terminal fragment/N-terminal fragment dimer, abolishes both presenilinase and -secretase activities. In addition, by reconstituting -secretase activity from two catalytically inactive presenilin aspartic mutants, we provide evidence of an active diaspartyl group assembled at the interface between two presenilin monomers. Under our conditions, this catalytic group mediates the generation of APP intracellular domain and A but not Notch intracellular domain, therefore suggesting that specific diaspartyl groups within the presenilin catalytic core of -secretase mediate the cleavage of different substrates.
   INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Presenilins (PS)1 are components of a high molecular weight multimeric enzymatic complex, the -secretase (1, 2). This enzymatic activity, whose identity has been elusive for some years, is responsible for the production of the A40/42 peptides. The deposition of insoluble aggregates of A40/42, mainly A42, results in the generation of amyloid plaques, one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease. A peptides are produced after a series of proteolytic cleavages of the precursor APP, a type I transmembrane (TM) protein. Cleavage of APP by - and -secretases generates the and C-terminal fragments (-CTF and -CTF, respectively), which are the substrates of -secretase. The intramembrane proteolytic cleavage by -secretase on -CTF generates the soluble p3 peptide, whereas the same cleavage on -CTF generates the A peptides. The more abundant A peptide forms, A40 and A42/43, are produced in a 9:1 ratio (reviewed in Ref. 3). Mutations in the presenilin 1 and 2 (PS1 and PS2) genes cause familiar autosomal dominant AD (FAD), and to date, up to 145 missense mutations have been reported (available on the World Wide Web at molgen-www.uia.ac.be/ADMutations/). These mutations, scattered throughout the coding sequence, trigger a shift in the ratio of A40/42 production in favor of the longer peptide form (A42/43) (4, 5), which is less soluble and serves as the core for amyloid plaque formation (6). In addition, -secretase also releases the APP intracellular domain (AICD) by cleavage at the site (7, 8). AICD translocates to the nucleus, where, together with other recruited proteins, it initiates transcriptional events (9, 10). Another type I TM substrate, the Notch receptor, is cleaved at the S3 site by -secretase. This proteolytic cleavage, also within the TM region, is a key step in Notch signal transduction, since it releases the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) (11). The analogous Notch S3 and APP sites are located within the TM region near the cytoplasmic domain (7, 8). In addition, Notch also undergoes an additional -secretase-mediated proteolysis in the middle of the transmembrane region (S4 site), analogous to the A-producing -secretase cleavage (12).
It is now widely accepted that PS1 and PS2 are the catalytic components of the -secretase complex, which appears to be an aspartyl protease whose activity resides at the interface between two presenilin fragments, the N-terminal (NTF) and the C-terminal (CTF) fragments (13, 14). The NTF and CTF presenilin moieties are most probably produced by autocatalytic presenilinase activity and are more stable than the PS holoprotein (15, 16). NTF and CTF heterodimerize with a 1:1 stoichiometry within the -secretase complex (17, 18), a complex that also contains nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2 at an as yet undetermined stoichiometry (2, 19, 20).
Many biochemical properties of -secretase activity are poorly understood, the most perplexing being its ability to cleave at two different sites within the transmembrane region of its substrates (the and cleavages of APP and the S3 and S4 sites of Notch) and the heterogeneity of the cleavage at the -site, which yields A peptides ranging from 32 to 43 amino acids (21). Although the presenilin catalytic center is composed of a diaspartyl group, the different inhibitory profiles of -secretase inhibitors obtained for A40, A42, and Notch cleavage suggest the presence of distinct catalytic activities (22 to 24). In addition, some presenilin FAD and non-FAD mutations behave as gain-of-function mutations with respect to A production and as loss-of-function mutations with respect to AICD and NICD release (25, 26), supporting the hypothesis that both activities can be separated (25, 27 to 30). Nonetheless, and despite the wealth of information gathered, there is still a lack of knowledge about the mechanism(s) by which FAD presenilin mutations, mainly located far from the catalytic site, are translated into subtle modifications in -secretase cleavage preferences. Studies with different inhibitors have shed some light on the presenilin catalytic mechanism (31 to 35). However, many issues related to substrate specificity, cleavage site specificity, and substrate binding site (or sites) remain to be clarified. Several scenarios have been postulated to explain these intriguing findings. Some reports argue that -secretase catalytic properties are incompatible with a single catalytic activity and propose that Notch and APP are cleaved by different proteases or by a protease with different catalytic sites (36 to 39). In contrast, other authors propose that -secretase activity is performed by a unique, albeit particularly complex, enzyme. This latter model has been recently expanded, since several newly described isoforms of some components of -secretase might allow the formation of more than four different variants of the -secretase complex (40).
A new view of the -secretase complex was put forward by our group and others, providing evidence that the functional -secretase core contains two presenilin molecules (26, 41 to 43) and that presenilin FAD mutants may produce subtle alterations in presenilin dimerization and hence alter -secretase tertiary and quaternary structure (41). In this report, we demonstrate that the hydrophobic transmembrane regions of presenilin contribute to the interactions within the dimer and that alterations of the dimer not related to the catalytic site, such as that affecting the HL1 domain, impair -secretase function. In addition, by reconstituting -secretase activity from two catalytically inactive presenilin aspartic mutants, we demonstrate that a functional diaspartyl catalytic group is formed at the interface of the NTF and CTF moieties from two different presenilin molecules.
   EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   DNA Constructs The initial split ubiquitin constructs containing the wild-type Drosophila PSN NTF (amino acids 1 to 322) and CTF (amino acids 321 to 541) were generated from the Nub- and Cub-derived constructs (44) as described elsewhere (41). In brief, a yeast centromeric plasmid was used to constitutively express the PSN NTF- or PSN CTF-derived constructs, which were fused in-frame to Cub-ProtA-LexA-Vp16. The fusion constructs containing NubG fused to PSN NTF and to PSN CTF were cloned into a multicopy yeast plasmid under the control of the inducible CUP1 promoter. All the presenilin variants analyzed here were generated by combining the corresponding PCR fragments in-frame, and the integrity of the coding sequence was confirmed by sequencing on the final construct.
To generate the constructs to be expressed in SL2 cells, an in-frame fusion containing an HA N-terminal tagged Drosophila presenilin (H-A-Psn) in pACT-2 (pACT-Psn) was subcloned into the expression vector pActPPA (kindly provided by Dr. A. Vaquero) to drive the expression of HA-PSN from a Drosophila actin 5C expression cassette. For the expression constructs bearing the N-terminal c-Myc-tagged Psn, a forward strand oligonucleotide (5'-CATGGAGGAACAAAAGCTGATTTCTGAAGAAGACTTGG-3') and its complementary reverse strand oligonucleotide (5'-AATTCCAAGTCTTCTTCAGAAATCAGCTTTTGTTCCTC-3'), coding for the c-Myc epitope, were annealed and cloned into the NcoI and EcoRI sites of pAS2 to 1-Psn. The entire c-Myc-Psn fusion was subcloned into pActPPA expression vector. The aspartic mutant PSNs were obtained by site-directed mutagenesis using the Psn template as described elsewhere (45). For the in-frame substitution of HL1 (amino acids 123 to 154) by HL5 (amino acids 261 to 267), a two-step cloning strategy was used. The resulting Psn cDNA, containing an N-terminal HA tag and the HL5 region after TMI, was cloned into a pActPPA expression plasmid to generate pActPPA-HA-PsnHL1 to 5. The pActPPA expression plasmids containing two Psn expression cassettes were obtained by subcloning the SalI fragment, containing the actin 5C expression cassette driving the expression of a c-Myc-tagged PSN, into the unique BstZ17I site of the plasmid pActPPA-HA-Psn.
For the -cleavage reporter assay of the Drosophila NECN, a NECN-GV3 construct in pBluescript SK was obtained by substituting the 400-bp AatII fragment from OGG513 with the 1.1-kb AatII fragment containing Gal4Vp16 from N932. Both plasmids, OGG513 and N932, were kindly provided by Dr. G. Struhl and had been tested in vivo in Drosophila (46). The NECN-GV3 fusion was subcloned into the KpnI/EcoRV sites of pActPPA. A C99-Gal4Vp16 construct in pCDNA3.1 was kindly provided by Dr. J. Lundkvist (47). The pCMV-luciferase plasmid (Stratagene) and an hsp70mp-5xG4-gal construct (a gift from Dr. A. Vaquero) were used as reporters.
For the assessment of A production, the SC100 construct encoding the human C99 -secretase substrate and the signal peptide of the rat preproenkephalin cDNA cloned into pAc5.1/V5-His was kindly provided by Dr. T. Tomita (48).
The integrity and conserved reading frame of all DNA constructs were confirmed by sequencing with PerkinElmer Life Sciences Big Dye 2.1 using a 3700 or 3730 DNA analyzer.
Split Ubiquitin Assay Yeast strain L40 was cotransformed with the corresponding Nub- and Cub-derived constructs (44) using the standard lithium acetate procedure. Transformants were selected for growth on SD to His/ to Trp/ to Leu supplemented with 25 mM 3-aminotriazole and 0.2 mM Cu2+. When necessary, protein/protein interactions were quantified by assessment of -galactosidase activity (reporter gene) in liquid culture using o-nitrophenyl p-D-galactopyranoside as a substrate following standard procedures.
Cell Culture and Transfection Drosophila Schneider's 2 cell line (SL2 cells) was maintained in Drosophila Schneider's insect medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen) at 27  degrees C. Transient transfections were performed with 4  microg of DNA and Cellfectin (Invitrogen) in 35-mm plates or 6-well plates following the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were harvested 72 h post-transfection. For stable transfections, the corresponding pActPPA expression plasmid was cotransfected with pCoHygro, kindly provided by Dr. D. Huertas. Two days post-transfection, cells were selected with 125  microg/ microl of hygromycin (Invitrogen) for 3 weeks, and from then on, stable cell lines were expanded. Cycloheximide treatment was performed as follows: 1 x 107 cells of each cell line were seeded in 60-mm plates and were allowed to attach to the plate surface. Subsequently, medium was removed and replaced with fresh medium supplemented with 30  microg/ml cycloheximide. Cells from each 60-mm plate were then harvested at the specified time points, washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline, and frozen at  to 80  degrees C for further analysis.
RNA Interference Experiments A dsRNA corresponding to the 5'- and 3'-UTRs of the Drosophila presenilin gene was obtained by in vitro transcription from pBluescript SK in which the 5' (144 bp) and 3' (106 bp) Psn UTR sequence had been previously cloned. This dsRNA was specifically targeted to disrupt endogenous presenilin expression without affecting exogenous presenilin, since the 5'- and 3'-UTRs of the latter were provided by the expression vector. Briefly, transcription from the T7 and the T3 promoter yielded forward and reverse single-stranded RNAs, respectively. The two complementary RNA strands were then annealed by heating for 10 min at 70  degrees C and subsequent incubation for 10 min at 37  degrees C to obtain the 250-bp 5'-UTR-3'-UTR dsRNA. Either 1 or 2  microg of dsRNA were co-transfected with the specified DNA constructs up to 4  microg of DNA/dsRNA mixture with Cellfectin as described above. Cells were harvested 72 h post-transfection to allow both protein turnover and RNA interference of the residual endogenous presenilin.
Protein Extractions and Immunoblotting Stable and transiently transfected cells were harvested and washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 min. For HA-PSN detection, total proteins were extracted in 250  microl for a 35-mm plate of transiently transfected cells, or 500  microl for a 25-cm2 flask or 60-mm plate of stably transfected cells, in lysis buffer I (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and a protease inhibitor mixture) and sonicated for 20 s on ice using a Branson sonicator 250. Insoluble proteins and cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4  degrees C. Proteins were quantified using the Bio-Rad DC protein assay. For immunoblotting, 10  microg of protein extracts were loaded onto a 6 M urea SDS-PAGE, transferred into a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane, and immunodetected with the monoclonal antibody HA.11 (Babco).
For c-Myc-PSN analysis, cell membranes were extracted with 0.5% dodecyl maltoside buffer as follows. Cells were resuspended in the volumes of homogenization buffer I (10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM sucrose, 2% Brij-35, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and protease inhibitors) indicated above and subjected to mechanical lysis in a Polytron homogenizer. A presenilin-enriched membrane fraction was obtained by subsequent centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 30 min at 4  degrees C. PSN was solubilized from the membrane pellet in 50 or 100  microl of buffer II (50 mM sodium citrate, pH 6.4, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and protease inhibitors) for 20 to 60 min on ice. Subsequently, total protein concentration was quantified using the Bio-Rad DC protein assay, and, after a clarifying spin, 20  microg of protein was subjected to electrophoresis as above. c-Myc-PSN was immunodetected with the monoclonal anti-Myc antibody 9E10 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA).
For detection of APP CTFs, protein extracts were prepared from Drosophila Schneider (SL2) cells by lysis on ice in radioimmune precipitation buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma). Lysates were sonicated, and protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). Protein extracts (10  microg) were mixed with 2x SDS sample buffer and resolved on 4 to 20% Tris/glycine gels (Invitrogen). For immunoblot analysis, proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes, incubated for 30 min in blocking buffer (10% nonfat milk, 0.1% bovine serum albumin, phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.4) followed by incubation with primary polyclonal antiserum specific for the C-terminal (residues 665 to 695) of APP ("Saeko"; 1:10,000) (49). APP CTFs were detected with the ECL plus chemiluminescence kit (PerkinElmer Life Sciences). The density of each band was quantified using NIH Image software and normalized to -tubulin (Sigma). The data represent the average  plus or minus  S.E. of three independent experiments.
-Cleavage of C99 and S3 Cleavage of NECN Substrates Co-expression of the C99-Gal4Vp16 or NECN-Gal4Vp16 fusion proteins, which are substrates for -secretase, together with the hsp70mp-5xG4-gal reporter construct (hereafter referred to as hsp70-UAS-gal), allowed quantification of presenilin-mediated cleavage. Stably transfected cells expressing presenilin constructs were transiently transfected with 2.3  microg of C99-Gal4Vp16, 500 ng of hsp70-UAS--gal, 200 ng of a cytomegalovirusluciferase control plasmid, and 1  microg of dsRNA. For analysis of NICD production, cells were transfected with 50 ng of NECN-Gal4Vp16, 1.85  microg of hsp70-UAS--gal, 100 ng of a pCMV-luciferase control plasmid, and 2  microg of dsRNA. All transfections were performed in 6-well plates, and the amount of transfected DNA/RNA was kept at 4  microg. Seventy-two hours post-transfection, cells were harvested, washed in cold phosphate-buffered saline, and lysed to quantify -galactosidase and luciferase activities with the -galactosidase reporter gene assay chemiluminescent (Roche Applied Science) or the luciferase assay system (Invitrogen), respectively, following the manufacturer's instructions.
ELISAs SL2 cells stably expressing wild-type or mutant PS variants were transiently transfected with a cDNA encoding the C-terminal 99 amino acids of APP (SC100) and/or dsRNA by using Cellfectin (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were incubated for 48 h to allow inactivation of endogenous Psn expression, and the old medium was then replaced with fresh medium for additional 48 h. Culture medium was collected on ice and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatants were collected, coded, and used for the ELISA analysis. A40 and A42 levels were determined by the 2G3/266B and 21F12/266B sandwich ELISA as previously described (50, 51). Values, normalized to cellular protein, represent the average of three independent transfections analyzed in duplicate.
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Contribution of the Presenilin Transmembrane Domains to the NTF/NTF, CTF/CTF, and NTF/CTF Interactions We had previously shown that Drosophila presenilin (PSN) forms a tetramer, with two NTFs and two CTFs (41), which should be more properly named a dimer, since NTF and CTF are processed products of a single molecule, the PSN holoprotein. After an exhaustive analysis of presenilin domain interactions by the yeast two-hybrid assay, our results highlighted the contribution of the hydrophilic loop connecting transmembranes I and II (HL1) to the NTF/NTF homodimerization, although no similar domains could be defined for CTF/CTF or NTF/CTF interactions (41). Presenilins show a very complex topology with eight transmembrane domains, which may also interact among them and contribute to the dimer formation. To dissect the possible contribution of transmembrane domains, not only to NTF/NTF but also to CTF/CTF and NTF/CTF dimerization, we relied on an alternative strategy that had been specifically designed to test protein/protein interactions between proteins anchored to the membrane, the split ubiquitin system (44). In this system, each of the proteins assayed for interaction is independently fused to either the N-terminal (Nub) domain, or to the C-terminal (Cub) domain of ubiquitin, which is in turn attached to the transcription factor LexA-VP16. If the two assayed proteins did interact, they would bring together the two ubiquitin moieties, reconstituting the ubiquitin entity, which would be then recognized and cleaved by the cellular deubiquitinating enzymes, thus triggering the transcription of several sensitive reporter and selective genes (the his3 and lacZ genes) (44). This strategy has already been successfully applied to detect and dissect membrane protein interactions of several proteins, including presenilin (41, 52). Several requirements have to be met in order to analyze a series of transmembrane deletions in frame. One of the requisites of this approach is that the Nub and Cub moieties of the ubiquitin have to be localized in the cytosol and that the Cub-LexA-VP16 fusion has to be at the end terminus of the protein fusion (44). In addition, the presenilin molecule should maintain the topology in the membrane. These requisites limited the number and combination of presenilin transmembrane domains that could be tested as they should be deleted in frame in even numbers.
All of the combinations tested and the result of the interaction assay are depicted in Fig. 1, A to C. The specificity of the interaction was confirmed by the absence of growth in yeast co-transformed with either PSN NTF-Cub-ProtA-LexA-Vp16 or PSN CTF-Cub-ProtA-LexA-Vp16 and another yeast ER transmembrane protein (Alg5-NubG) (as shown in Ref. 41). The main conclusion of these interaction assays was that the transmembrane domains did indeed play an important role in NTF/NTF, CTF/CTF, and NTF/CTF dimerization, particularly transmembranes 3 to 6 of NTF and 7 and 8 of CTF.
View larger version (37K):    FIG. 1. Contribution of the presenilin transmembrane domains to the NTF/CTF, NTF/NTF, and CTF/CTF dimerization as assayed by the yeast split ubiquitin system. The presenilin domains were tested in different combinations of in-frame fusion constructs, with either Nub- or Cub-LexA-VP16, as indicated. Interactions were detected by selective growth on medium lacking histidine. A, dissection of the transmembrane domain contribution to the NTF/CTF interaction. B, dissection of the transmembrane domain contribution to the NTF/NTF interaction. C, dissection of the transmembrane domain contribution to the CTF/CTF interaction. D, effect of the substitution of HL1 by HL5 in the NTF/NTF dimerization, as assessed by quantification of the activation of the lacZ reporter gene, using o-nitrophenyl p-D-galactopyranoside as a substrate. The asterisk indicates statistical significance by the U-Mann-Whitney test (*, p  <  0.05; **, p  <  0.01; n = 4 replicates).
  In our previous work, we proposed that HL1 played an important role in dimer formation and, probably, in the conformation of the presenilin -secretase complex due to homomeric protein/protein interactions mediated by this domain. In support of this, 14 of the 145 mutations in PS1 and PS2 cluster in this 32-amino acid loop, and all of the FAD mutations that we analyzed altered HL1/HL1 dimerization (41). Nonetheless, the results depicted in Fig. 1, A and B, suggested that the region comprising the N terminus-TMI-HL1-TMII domains was not required for NTF/NTF or NTF/CTF interactions, given that its deletion did not affect the strength of the NTF/NTF or NTF/CTF interactions compared with that of wild-type fragments (as assessed semiquantitatively by growth on selective medium). To further address the role of HL1 in NTF/NTF homodimerization, we undertook a new series of experiments to analyze whether the NTF/NTF interaction and dimerization would be altered when the HL1 loop sequence was substituted by another connecting loop so that the topology and relative position of all transmembrane domains were still maintained. To this end, we generated an NTF variant, named NTF1 to 5, in which HL1 (amino acids 123 to 154 of PSN) was replaced by HL5, a shorter ER-facing connecting loop peptide of PSN (amino acids 261 to 267 of PSN). This in-frame substitution did not alter the number of transmembranes or the connecting loops, and the general NTF topology should be preserved. To directly test NTF/NTF interaction in the membrane, we again resorted to the split ubiquitin system, which we had previously shown allowed presenilin to be properly anchored in the membrane. The interaction between different combinations of wild type NTF and NTF1 to 5 were assessed by quantification of the lacZ reporter activity (Fig. 1D). According to these results, replacement of HL1 increases the strength of the NTF/NTF interaction, thus confirming the contribution of other domains to the formation and stability of the dimer and indicating that the HL1 may have a modulatory role on NTF/NTF interaction and thus in presenilin dimerization. In contrast, none of the hydrophilic domains of the CTF domain seemed to be a determinant for any structural interactions, since they could be deleted without affecting CTF/CTF or NTF/CTF interactions (Fig. 1, A and C).
Expression and Metabolism of an HL1 Presenilin Mutant  These observations, pointing to a modulatory role of HL1 on the formation of the presenilin dimer, prompted us to further investigate the contribution of this ER-facing loop to the presenilinase and -secretase activities in vivo. From the NTF1 to 5 variant, we engineered a new PSN mutant in which HL1 was substituted by HL5. This recombinant PSN was named PSNHL1 to 5. As already mentioned, the in-frame substitution of the HL1 did not alter the number of TMs or connecting loops of the resulting PSN (Fig. 2A). Using Drosophila SL2 cells as a homologous expression system, we stably transfected and overexpressed several constructs, bearing either wild-type or mutant N-terminal HA-tagged PSNs (wtPSN or PSNHL1 to 5), and assessed their expression and processing by Western blot analyses of protein lysates (Fig. 2B). The addition of the HA tag at the N terminus of PSN did not alter presenilinase processing of wtPSN, which was endoproteolytically cleaved in both transient and stable transfectants. In contrast, PSNHL1 to 5 did not generate the corresponding NTF fragment and behaved like the null presenilin mutants of the catalytic aspartic acid residues (Fig. 2B), thus demonstrating that HL1 is essential for PSN endoproteolysis.
View larger version (34K):    FIG. 2. Expression and metabolism of the PSNHL1 to 5 variant. A, scheme showing the predicted dimer structure of PSNHL1 to 5, a PSN mutant in which HL1 has been substituted by HL5 (note that the presenilinase cleavage is not depicted, since autoproteolytic processing of this variant is completely abolished). B, Western blots of total protein extracts (10  microg) from transiently (left) and stably (right) transfected SL2 cells immunodetected with an anti-HA monoclonal antibody. C, Western blots of total protein extracts (10  microg) from stably transfected cells, which expressed either wtPSN, PSND461A, or PSNHL1 to 5 variants, treated with cycloheximide to block total protein synthesis for the indicated period of time, and immunodetected with anti-HA.
  We then tested the subcellular localization and protein stability of the PSNHL1 to 5 mutant. Immunofluorescent analysis in transfected SL2 cells revealed similar subcellular distribution, mainly in ER compartments, of wtPSN, PSNHL1 to 5, and the PSND461A mutant (data not shown). To assess presenilin stability, total protein synthesis was inhibited by cycloheximide treatment, and cells were harvested at different times. Immunodetection of lysates from stably transfected cells using an anti-HA antibody showed that the PSNHL1 to 5 holoprotein was more stable over time than the wtPSN holoprotein (Fig. 2C), since substantial amounts of PSNHL1 to 5 were still detected after 10 h of treatment. This observation indicates that, in contrast to wtPSN, a proportion of PSNHL1 to 5 holoprotein pool is stabilized, similarly to other reported mutant presenilin holoproteins (30, 53).
The HL1 Domain of PSN Is Required for -Secretase Activity To determine the effects on -secretase activity due to alteration of the PSN HL1 domain, we next examined the ability of the PSNHL1 to 5 mutant to mediate the - and -cleavages of a human APP-derived substrate, C99 fused to Gal4Vp16 (C99-GVP), to generate A and AICD, respectively. Previous control experiments in SL2 cells stably transfected with either wtPSN (positive control) or PSN single (PSND461A and PSND279A) or double (PSND461A+D279A) aspartic mutants (negative controls) confirmed the expression of these exogenous tagged PSN variants. We then analyzed the production of AICD by performing a quantitative assay based on a -galactosidase reporter system activated by substrate cleavage (47). We chose to assay -secretase activity by using reporter-based assays, since they are widely used to monitor signaling pathways mediated by cleavage in Drosophila, are highly sensitive, and can be easily quantified. Besides, the same substrate in a similar assay has been successfully used very recently to characterize -secretase activity of PS1 variants (54, 55).
Control assays using empty vector stably transfected cells showed detectable levels of -galactosidase activity, thus indicating endogenous presenilin--secretase activity. To avoid the background by endogenous presenilin, we designed and performed RNAi experiments with dsRNA (250 bp) corresponding to the fused 5'- and 3'-UTR sequences of the Drosophila PSN gene. This dsRNA was co-transfected along with the assay constructs in order to specifically knock-down endogenous PSN without altering the levels of the tagged exogenous PSN expression (as confirmed by Western blot analysis; data not shown). Treatment with dsRNA targeting the endogenous presenilin produced a significant decrease in -galactosidase activity in stably vector-transfected cells, whereas the -galactosidase activity of the stably wtPSN-transfected cells remained unaltered (data not shown). To assess whether the 5'-UTR-3'-UTR dsRNA reduced cleavage at the -site of the C99 substrate by the endogenous presenilin and therefore decreased A production, SL2 cells were transiently transfected with an SC100 construct encoding the C99 substrate (48) along with dsRNA. Forty-eight hours post-transfection, medium was replaced to quantify de novo produced A peptides after RNAi treatment. The production of A40 and A42 peptides was clearly reduced after dsRNA treatment (Fig. 3A, left), indicating an efficient disruption of endogenous presenilin activity. Interestingly, the dsRNA treatment did not alter the production of the A42 peptide relative to total A, and thus, the A40/42 ratio remained unaffected in dsRNA-treated cells (Fig. 3A, right). This decrease in the endogenous presenilin activity (as measured by A production) correlated with the accumulation of -CTF stubs generated by -secretase cleavage (Fig. 3B). These results further confirmed the efficiency of the dsRNA interference, and thus, from here on, all experiments were performed in dsRNA-treated cells.
View larger version (37K):    FIG. 3. Substitution of HL1 impairs AICD, A, and NICD production. Control assays in SL2 cells with dsRNA targeting the 5'- and 3'-UTRs of PSN showed reduction of endogenous PSN activity as measured by the following. A, A40/42 production analyzed by sandwich ELISA in SL2 cells transiently transfected with the SC100 construct (left); the ratio of A production (%A42 of the total) is not altered by dsRNA treatment (right); B, -secretase cleavage of the excess SC100 substrate (not cleaved by -secretase) produced the -CTF stub. C, SL2 cells stably expressing the indicated PSN variants were transiently transfected with the C99-Gal4Vp16 construct along with dsRNA (n = 8, in three independent experiments). D, A40/42 production quantified by sandwich ELISA in SL2 cells stably transfected with the indicated PSN variants and transiently transfected with the SC100 construct along with dsRNA (n = 3, all independent transfections). E, Western blots of protein lysates from the cells analyzed in D, immunodetected with an antibody specific for the C terminus of APP (amino acids 665 to 695). F, SL2 cells stably expressing the indicated PSN variants were transiently transfected with the NECN-Gal4Vp16 construct along with dsRNA (n = 4, in two independent experiments). Statistical significance according to the U-Mann-Whitney test was as follows: *, p  <  0.05; ***, p  <  0.005.
  To assess the activity of the PSNHL1 to 5 mutant, we analyzed the production of AICD (-cleavage), NICD (S3 cleavage), and A (-cleavage) in HA-PSNHL1 to 5 stably transfected cells using the aforementioned quantitative reporter-based strategy. After several timing controls, cells were harvested 72 h post-transfection to allow both efficient RNA interference and endogenous presenilin protein turnover. The -galactosidase activity, which measured AICD production (-cleavage), was obtained in mutant stably transfected cells and compared with that of wtPSN (which was considered 100%). Remarkably, the -secretase activity in PSNHL1 to 5 stable cell lines, assessed on the C99-GVP substrate, was completely abolished, yielding values similar to those of the TMVII aspartic mutant presenilin, PSND461A (Fig. 3C). This result showed that HL1 appears to be essential for the -cleavage of APP and, consequently, for AICD production. We next tested whether the PSNHL1 to 5 mutant cleaved the APP-derived substrate to produce the A40 and A42 peptides (-cleavage). Stable cell lines expressing different presenilin variants were transiently transfected with the SC100 construct, and A production in the cell medium was subsequently analyzed. As shown in Fig. 3D, the expression of the PSNHL1 to 5 mutant resulted in a significant 10-fold decrease in A production. The impairment of -secretase activity correlated with the accumulation of - and -CTF stubs (Fig. 3E). These results demonstrate that the HL1 of PSN is required for both - and -cleavages of APP.
We then examined the ability of PSNHL1 to 5 to cleave a Notch substrate at the S3 site by using the same reporter-based strategy. A Drosophila Notch-derived substrate lacking the extracellular domain (NECN) and fused to the transcription factor Gal4Vp16, NECN-GVP, was co-transfected with the aforementioned reporter constructs in SL2 cells. The -galactosidase activity was significantly decreased in the PSNHL1 to 5 mutant (as it was in the PSND461A mutant) compared with wtPSN (Fig. 3F). Altogether, these results confirmed that indeed the HL1 domain plays a modulating role in the presenilin dimerization and showed that substitution of HL1 by another connecting domain resulted in a complete loss of -secretase function concerning presenilinase activity, the - and -cleavages of APP, as well as the S3 cleavage of Notch, without affecting PSN stability.
The Aspartic Residues Asp279 and Asp461 from Different Presenilin Holoproteins Constitute an Active Catalytic Center  Our results indicate that correct presenilin dimerization is required for -secretase function, probably as a means to ensure a correct positioning of the transmembrane domains and, hence, of the aspartic residues in the catalytic core. Presenilin dimerization would bring together four aspartic residues, two from each monomer, thus allowing different combinations of functional aspartyl groups at the catalytic core of -secretase. Several points are raised by this model, not the least being whether the presenilin dimer is a requirement for -secretase activity and, if so, whether all four aspartic residues are required for -secretase activity or only two aspartic residues will be sufficient for cleavage. If the latter was the case, new questions are posed, such as whether any diaspartyl combinations are equally functional or whether specific diaspartyl groups mediate substrate recognition and/or cleavage site preferences. The proposed presenilin quaternary conformation (26, 41, 42) enables the formation of up to six catalytic diaspartyl groups within the -secretase complex (Fig. 4A; some reciprocal diaspartyl combinations are not shown for simplicity). The assembly of functional diaspartyl groups involving either two TMVI aspartic residues (Asp257 in human PS1, corresponding to Asp279 in Drosophila PSN) or the two aspartic residues from TM VII (Asp385 in human PS1, corresponding to Asp461 in Drosophila PSN) can be discarded (Fig. 4A, schemes on the left), since PS aspartic mutants D257A and D385A have been clearly shown to impair presenilinase and -secretase activities (reviewed in Ref. 56), and expression of either NTF or CTF peptides in PS-deficient cells is not able to cleave an APP-derived substrate (55). Therefore, besides the expected diaspartyl groups formed between the NTF and the CTF within each monomer (Fig. 4A, second scheme on the right; the reciprocal diaspartyl group is not shown), two other -secretase catalytic centers may be assembled in trans at the interface between two presenilin monomers, each contributing with one different aspartic (Asp257 and Asp385 in human PS1) to the catalytic core (Fig. 4A, last scheme on the right; again the reciprocal diaspartyl group is not shown).
View larger version (31K):    FIG. 4. Asp279 and Asp461 from different PSN holoproteins constitute an active catalytic center. A, scheme of the PSN dimer model, depicting only the TMs VI and VII with the potential functional diaspartyl groups (black boxes) acting (arrows) on a potential substrate. Diaspartyl groups formed between two TMVI 257 aspartic residues (left), two TMVII 385 aspartic residues (second scheme on the left), the aspartic residuesof the NTF and CTF from the same PSN monomer (second scheme on the right), and the aspartic residues of the NTF and CTF from different PSN monomers (right). The numbering is according to human PS1. B, protein lysates from SL2 cells stably expressing the indicated PSN variants immunodetected with anti-HA (left) or anti-c-Myc (right). C, SL2 cells stably expressing the indicated PSN variants were transiently transfected with the C99-Gal4Vp16 construct, the -galactosidase and luciferase reporter plasmids, and dsRNA (n = 10, in four independent experiments). D, A production quantified by sandwich ELISA in SL2 cells stably transfected with the PSN variants indicated and transiently transfected with the SC100 construct along with dsRNA (n = 3, all independent transfections and normalized against protein concentration). The last lane indicates endogenous activity (end) of cells untreated with dsRNA. E, the %A42 of the total did not differ between the wtPSN, the reconstituted -secretase activity (HA-PSND279A/Myc-PSND461A), and the endogenous PSN. F, Western blots of protein lysates from the cells analyzed in D, immunodetected with an antibody specific for the C terminus of APP (amino acids 665 to 695) and their relative quantification. G, SL2 cells stably expressing the indicated PSN variants were transiently transfected with the NECN-Gal4Vp16 construct and the two reporter plasmids along with dsRNA (n = 4 replicates, in two independent experiments). Statistical significance according to the U-Mann Whitney Test was as follows: *, p  <  0.05; ***, p  <  0.005.
  We designed an experimental approach based on genetic complementation between two different aspartic mutants to assess whether the TMVI aspartic residue (Asp279 in Drosophila PSN/Asp257 in human PS1) from one monomer formed a functional diaspartyl group with the TMVII aspartic residue (Asp461 in Drosophila PSN/Asp385 in human PS1) from the other. If this were the case, we should be able to reconstitute -secretase activity from the two catalytically inactive aspartic mutants, thus providing further evidence that presenilins functions as a dimer in vivo and that at least two aspartic residues are required. To our knowledge, this possibility has not been formally tested before. We constructed a double cassette expression plasmid to stably co-express two presenilin mutants, HA-PSND279A and c-Myc-PSND461A, in SL2 cells. To assess -secretase activity, we analyzed the production of AICD, A, and NICD using the corresponding substrates. In cells stably expressing both PSN mutants, we predicted the formation of three different complexes: the inactive homodimers containing the same mutation and thus containing either two 461 or two 279 aspartic residues (HA-PSND279A/HA-PSND279A and Myc-PSND461A/Myc-PSND461A, respectively) and the heterodimeric complex with one aspartic 461 and one aspartic 279 (HA-PSND279A/Myc-PSND461A), at a 1:1:2 ratio. If a functional catalytic site were formed between the two mutant monomers, we would expect that the presenilin heterodimer PSND279A/PSND461A would produce one or more of the presenilin-dependent cleavage products (AICD, NICD, and A40/42).
We first analyzed the expression levels of different presenilin mutants in stably transfected SL2 cells. Western blot analyses of cell lysates showed high levels of expression of the HA-tagged (Fig. 4B, left) and the Myc-tagged presenilins (Fig. 4B, right), even when co-expressed. In contrast to cells co-expressing HA-wtPSN and c-Myc-wtPSN, no presenilinase activity was detected when the HA-PSND279A and c-Myc-PSND461A mutants were co-expressed (Fig. 4B, right). Thus, no presenilinase activity was reconstituted, and only mutant presenilin holoproteins could assemble at the dimer core of the -secretase complex in these cells.
To evaluate the production of AICD generated by the -cleavage activity, stable cell lines were co-transfected with the C99-GVP substrate and the corresponding reporter constructs. Interestingly, we observed that, in contrast to the -galactosidase activities of the single and double aspartic D279A and D461A mutants, co-expression of both single mutant presenilins resulted in a significantly higher -secretase activity (Fig. 4C), amounting to 50% of the wild-type presenilin value. This result shows that co-expression of the two mutants, PSND279A and PSND461A, restores AICD production, providing strong evidence that an active catalytic site is formed between the NTF and the CTF aspartics from different presenilins within the same complex. Similarly, the production of A40/42 from the C99 substrate was determined. Again, and in contrast to the abolition of A40 and A42 production in cells expressing only one single (either PSND279A or PSND461A) or double (PSND279A+D461A) aspartic mutants, coexpression of the two PSN mutants restored the production of the A40 and A42 to the same level as endogenous PSN in cells untreated with dsRNA (Fig. 4D), around 25 to 30% of that achieved by overexpression of wtPSN. Furthermore, the A40/42 ratio in cells expressing the combination of both aspartic mutants was similar to that of wtPSN (Fig. 4E). The rescue of -secretase activity due to the co-expression of the two aspartic mutants was further confirmed by a significant reduction of -CTFs levels in these cells compared with cells expressing each mutant, PSND279A and PSND461A, alone (Fig. 4F). Note the statistical significance of the decrease in the -CTF levels when co-expressing the two mutants (lane 5), compared with those of the single or double mutants expressed on their own (lanes 2 to 4, which were not statistically different among them).
To assess S3 cleavage, we performed a similar series of experiments with the NECN-GVP substrate. Remarkably, and in contrast to the APP-derived C99 substrate, the co-expression of the PSND279A and PSND461A mutants did not restore NICD production (Fig. 4G). In fact, the null values obtained were comparable with those for the single PSND461A mutant. Taken together, these results indicate that the functional diaspartyl group formed between the NTF and CTF from two different presenilins restore -secretase activity, at least to mediate and cleavages of C99, but also that this diaspartyl group may display substrate specificity, since it is able to discriminate between the two substrates, C99 and NECN.
   DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   The aim of this study was to provide evidence to support that a presenilin dimer is the catalytic core of the functional -secretase complex. To this end, we focused on two different aspects of the presenilin protein, structure and function. On the one hand, we assessed the contribution of the transmembrane domains to NTF/NTF, CTF/CTF, and NTF/CTF interactions and analyzed the functional consequences of substituting a short region putatively involved in modulating NTF/NTF homodimerization, and on the other, we explored the contribution of the potential diaspartyl catalytic groups predicted from the dimeric presenilin to -secretase function.
Evidence for presenilin dimerization was first gathered from yeast two-hybrid assays, which mostly assessed the ability of hydrophilic domains and large presenilin fragments to selfassociate (41, 42). Nonetheless, exhaustive analysis of in situ interactions performed in membrane-anchored presenilin domains to study the contribution of the hydrophobic transmembranes to dimerization was missing. The split ubiquitin system (44) allowed us to design a test for assaying different combinations of TM regions, grouped by even numbers in order to preserve the general presenilin topology and the cytosolic/lumen direction of the domains. Our results show that presenilin transmembrane domains are relevant for interactions within the NTF/NTF, CTF/CTF, and NTF/CTF dimers, either for assembly or stabilization, and therefore for the maintenance of the tertiary and quaternary presenilin structure. In this context, the fact that the hydrophobic domains are the most evolutionarily conserved presenilin regions and that FAD mutations are mainly concentrated on these transmembrane domains indicate that even conservative changes may cause subtle disturbances in dimerization and final quaternary structure, which are then reflected in shifts of the substrate cleavage sites.
Previous results from our group showed that the HL1 domain (the hydrophilic loop connecting TMI and TMII) from two NTFs interacted and were involved in NTF/NTF homodimerization (41). In addition to being the largest ER-facing loop, the highly evolutionarily conserved HL1 domain is the presenilin hydrophilic region that clusters the highest number of FAD mutations. Remarkably, the FAD mutations analyzed altered the formation of the HL1 HL1 complex (41). The substitution of this domain increased NTF/NTF interaction, thus indicating that, more than being a requirement for interaction, it may rather play a modulatory role in dimerization as a means to achieve a correct presenilin tertiary or quaternary structure. We therefore focused on this domain to assess its contribution to presenilin structure and function. Interestingly, substitution of HL1 for another ER-hydrophilic connecting loop, HL5, which presumably generates a topologically equivalent presenilin protein, totally inhibited presenilinase activity. In addition, production of AICD, A, and NICD was completely absent in cells expressing this PSN variant. This abrogation of presenilinase and -secretase activities was not due to increased presenilin instability, since the PSNHL1 to 5 mutant holoprotein was still detected after 10 h of cycloheximide treatment, thus proving to be much more stable than the wtPSN holoprotein. Although we cannot rule out the possibility that the inhibition of the -secretase activity in this PSN mutant is a secondary effect of the lack of presenilin endoproteolysis, we do not favor this explanation, since presenilinase and -secretase activities do not necessarily correlate (30, 57). Another presenilin variant lacking HL1 has been analyzed. The TM1 to 2 PS1 mutant (with a deletion comprising the TMI-HL1-TMII regions) was able to generate the A peptides (30), although the maturation and trafficking of the -secretase complex components were highly altered. A similar effect of our PSNHL1 to 5 mutant could be assumed. However, we deem it unlikely, since the presenilin transmembrane regions, integrally maintained in the PSNHL1 to 5 but not in the TM1 to 2 mutant, mediate the interactions within the -secretase complex (58 to 60). Recently, it has been suggested that presenilin endoproteolysis is a regulatory event that causes a cleavage-induced conformational change by which presenilin becomes an activated enzyme (61). According to this report, the presenilinase cleavage would retrieve the loop encoded by exon 9, which would otherwise occupy the presenilin substrate-binding site. If this was the case, we should then surmise that the TM1 to 2 mutant adopted a conformation that relieved the exon 9 peptide from the binding pocket, whereas the conformation of the PSNHL1 to 5 variant allowed neither endoproteolysis processing nor the retrieval of exon 9 peptide; hence, -secretase activity might be severely compromised.
In any case, complete loss of presenilinase and -secretase activities has been previously achieved by mutating the catalytic aspartic residues; by altering the C-terminal region, which appears to be relevant for presenilin stability; or by altering the regions proximal to the presenilinase catalytic site (16, 53 to 55, 62). Here, we show that the alteration of a region located far from the catalytic site and not involved in presenilin stability causes inhibition of presenilinase and -secretase functions. Hence, substitution of HL1, which plays an important role on PSN structure and assembly, has devastating functional effects and suggests that proper presenilin dimerization and assembly within the -secretase complex is essential for its proteolytic function. In this context, FAD mutations located in HL1 may subtly alter presenilin dimerization and positioning of transmembranes and, thus, generate a shift on the substrate cleavage site preferences.
One prediction of the presenilin dimer in the -secretase core is the formation of more than one catalytic diaspartyl group. We addressed whether all the diaspartyl combinations were functional. Our results showed reconstitution of active -secretase when two different presenilin aspartic mutants were co-expressed, as a functional diaspartyl group was formed with the TMVI Asp279 aspartic residue (Asp257 in human PS1) from one PSN monomer and the TMVII D461 aspartic residue (Asp385 in human PS1) from the other (Fig. 4, C and D). Not only did this diaspartyl group cleave the C99-APP-derived substrate at both - and -sites, but it also produced A40 and A42 peptides in the same ratio as the wtPSN, thus suggesting that a similar diaspartyl combination is responsible for APP - and -cleavages in vivo. Remarkably, the fact that in the same experimental conditions this catalytic group does not generate NICD by S3 cleavage supports the idea that different requirements have to be met for APP and Notch cleavages, in agreement with previous reports (25, 27 to 29, 63). In addition, our results suggest that presenilinase activity requires the formation of a diaspartyl group between the NTF and CTF from the same monomer. According to our results, endoproteolytic processing is no longer a requirement for presenilin activation when co-expressing the two presenilin aspartic mutants. These presenilin aspartic mutants might adopt a slightly different conformation that would not need to retrieve exon 9 from the binding substrate site (61).
We have ruled out some possible concerns about the reconstitution of -secretase activity in our experimental conditions on the following grounds: (i) we discarded any domain swapping between the two mutant presenilin molecules, first because this event has already been ruled out in presenilins by several authors in previous reports (26, 64, 65), and, moreover, in our case presenilin domain swapping was completely prevented, since the expressed mutants were not endoproteolytically cleaved into the NTF and CTF fragments; (ii) even if considering some residual endogenous presenilin-dependent or -independent -secretase activity after RNAi treatment and the fact that not all presenilin mutants might be equally effective in replacing this residual activity, the fact that each individual mutant abrogated -secretase activity, as measured by loss of A, AICD, and NICD production (Fig. 4, C, D, and G), whereas in the same experimental conditions co-expression of the two mutants restored between 30 and 50% of the wild-type activity (in accordance with the heterodimer PSND279A/PSND461A representing only one-half of the dimer population), indicated that genetic complementation between the two mutants occurred, and a functional diaspartyl group was assembled in trans; and finally, (iii) this reconstituted -secretase activity only cleaved the APP-derived substrates, whereas the activity on Notch-derived ones was completely impaired. Were other presenilin-independent activities to account for the APP processing but not for Notch cleavage, these activities should be detected in all of the mutant controls, which obviously was not the case.
Hence, the fact that -secretase activity is restored only after co-expression of the two aspartic mutant presenilins within the same cell and that this activity discriminates between the two substrates, in contrast to the wild-type or endogenous presenilin, makes complementation of the two presenilin mutants the highest likely explanation for the restoration of -secretase activity. We concluded that the reconstituted presenilin catalytic function was due to the bona fide formation of a diaspartyl group in trans at the interface of the two mutant presenilins, each providing one different aspartic residue. Our results are also completely consistent and provide a feasible explanation for the recent report on the rescue of presenilinase and -secretase activity on a C99 substrate by co-expression of an inactive C-terminally truncated presenilin mutant with wild-type CTF, but not by a mutant aspartic CTF, in PS-deficient cells (54).
Based on our results, we propose a model in which the catalytic diaspartyl groups responsible for cleaving these substrates partially overlap within the same presenilin -secretase complex. Thus, the Asp257/Asp385 group formed in trans at the interface of the two presenilin monomers would cleave a C99 substrate, whereas the Asp257/Asp385 group in cis between the NTF and CTF moieties of the same molecule would process an NECN substrate (Fig. 5). The experimental approach with the two aspartic mutants did not allow to test the second possibility. This hypothesis is consistent with the divergent transmembrane sequences of both substrates, which, according to our model, would be cleaved by different diaspartyl combinations. It should be noted that the observations presented here are fully compatible with the recently proposed models in which -secretase may contain separated docking and catalytic sites (26, 35, 66 to 68). Other scenarios are also compatible with our observations. One is that the conformation of the HA-PSND279A/Myc-PSND461A heterodimer hinders the access to the catalytic site of the NECN substrate, but not that of the C99. In this context, if the conformations of the mutants were slightly different from the wild-type protein, mutations on the catalytic site could alter in turn the accessibility to the binding site, allowing the access of C99 but still hampering that of the NECN substrate. A second alternative might be that the mutant presenilins are addressed to a cellular compartment different from the wild type, allowing access to the APP-derived substrate while precluding that of the Notch substrate. Another alternative is that recognition and/or cleavage of the NECN substrate requires at least three aspartic residues of the presenilin dimer, similar to what has been suggested (26). Finally, other authors have proposed that different isoforms (PS-1, PS-2, aph-1aL, aph-1aS, and aph-1b) assemble in different -secretase complexes to provide substrate specificity (40). This does not apply to our model because the components of the -secretase complex are encoded by single copy genes in Drosophila (2). Notwithstanding, and irrespective of the number and composition of the -secretase complexes, once the substrate has reached the catalytic center, it may be cleaved by a specific diaspartyl group, which could differ between different substrates.
View larger version (22K):    FIG. 5. Hypothetical model of C99 and NECN presenilin/-secretase cleavage. The diaspartyl group formed by one aspartic acid 257 and one aspartic acid 385 (in black) from two presenilin molecules cleaves a C99 substrate (A) both at the - and -sites, whereas an NECN substrate (B) is cleaved by the diaspartyl group (in black) formed with the NTF and CTF from the same monomer. The numbering is according to human PS1.
  The FAD mutations analyzed to date do not alter the presenilin-mediated -secretase cleavages (-site, -site, and S3 site) in the same manner, again suggesting that the molecular mechanisms involved in regulating -secretase activities are very complex (25 to 27). All of these FAD mutations alter the A42/40 ratio, whereas their effects on NICD and AICD production are more variable. According to our model, each presenilin FAD mutation would have a specific effect on each diaspartyl combination, thus entailing a shift in cleavage site preferences or even substrate affinity.
Presenilins belong to an emerging family of unusual diaspartyl proteases, the I-CLiPs (56, 69), whose characteristics include complex structural topology and the ability to carry out regulated intramembraneous proteolysis of substrates (70). Remarkably, another of its members, the signal peptide peptidase, has been recently reported to form a homodimer that is labeled by inhibitors directed against the active site of -secretase (71). The finding that two aspartyl I-CLiPs, signal peptide peptidase and presenilins, function as dimers that are recognized by the same active site inhibitor suggests that dimerization may be a general requirement for function or regulation of this family of proteases and provides new insights on how regulated intramembraneous proteolysis may take place.
To sum up and as a main conclusion, we reconstituted -secretase activity through co-expression of two distinct, catalytically inactive, aspartic presenilin mutants and provided evidence that presenilin functions as a dimer within the -secretase complex and that a functional diaspartyl group is formed at the interface of this dimer. Disturbance of presenilin dimerization compromise and even abrogates presenilinase and -secretase activities.
   FOOTNOTES   * This study was funded by Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia Grant PM99-0168 (to R. G.-D.) and a New Investigator Research Grant from the Alzheimer's Association (to C. A. S.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Present address: UCSF Diabetes Center, Parnassus Campus, San Francisco, CA 94143.
|| Present address: Institut de Neurociencies, Universitat Aut&ograve;noma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona 08193, Spain.
** To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: 34-934021502; Fax: 34-934110969; E-mail: gmarfany{at}ub.edu' + u + '@' + d + ''//-->.
1 The abbreviations used are: PS, presenilin(s); PSN, Drosophila presenilin(s); wtPSN, wild type PSN; FAD, familiar autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease; TM, transmembrane; CTF, C-terminal fragment; NTF, N-terminal fragment; AICD, APP intracellular domain; NICD, Notch intracellular domain; HA, hemagglutinin; dsRNA, double-stranded RNA; UTR, untranslated region; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; APP, amyloid precursor protein.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   We are grateful to Neus Abella for technical support and to Jennifer Strahle and Weiming Xia for the ELISA assays of A peptides. We are very grateful to Dr. Dori Huertas (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC), Barcelona, Spain) for the gift of the plasmid pCoHygro; Dr. Alejandro Vaquero (CSIC) for the gift of plasmids and constructs pActPPA, pActPPA-Gal4BD, and hsp70mp-5xG4-gal; Dr. Gary Struhl (Columbia University, New York) for the gift of the OGG513 and N932 constructs; Dr. Johan Lundkvist (Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden) for the gift of the C99-Gal4Vp16 construct; Dr. Taisuke Tomita (University of Tokyo) for the gift of the SC100 construct, and Dr. Mikio Shoji for the "Saeko" antibody. We thank the Serveis Cientifico-Tecnics de la Universitat de Barcelona for the use of the 3700 and 3730 DNA analyzer and Robin Rycroft for revising the English.
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Li, Y. M., Lai, M. T., Xu, M., Huang, Q., DiMuzio, M. J., Sardana, M. K., Shi, X. P., Yin, K. C., Shafer, J. A., and Gardell, S. J. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 6138 to 6143[Abstract/Free Full Text] Francis, R., McGrath, G., Zhang, J., Ruddy, D. A., Sym, M., Apfeld, J., Nicoll, M., Maxwell, M., Hai, B., Ellis, M. C., Parks, A. L., Xu, W., Li, J., Gurney, M., Myers, R. L., Himes, C. S., Hiebsch, R., Ruble, C., Nye, J. S., and Curtis, D. (2002) Dev. Cell 3, 85 to 97[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] De Strooper, B., and Annaert, W. (2000) J. Cell Sci. 113, 1857 to 1870[Abstract/Free Full Text] Borchelt, D. R., Thinakaran, G., Eckman, C. B., Lee, M. K., Davenport, F., Ratovitsky, T., Prada, C. M., Kim, G., Seekins, S., Yager, D., Slunt, H. H., Wang, R., Seeger, M., Levey, A. I., Gandy, S. E., Copeland, N. G., Jenkins, N. A., Price, D. L., Younkin, S. G., and Sisodia, S. S. (1996) Neuron 17, 1005 to 1013[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Scheuner, D., Eckman, C., Jensen, M., Song, X., Citron, M., Suzuki, N., Bird, T. D., Hardy, J., Hutton, M., Kukull, W., Larson, E., Levy-Lahad, E., Viitanen, M., Peskind, E., Poorkaj, P., Schellenberg, G., Tanzi, R., Wasco, W., Lannfelt, L., Selkoe, D., and Younkin, S. (1996) Nat. Med. 2, 864 to 870[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Jarrett, J., Berger, E. P., and Lansbury, P. T. J. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 4693 to 4697[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Gu, Y., Misonou, H., Sato, T., Dohmae, N., Takio, K., and Ihara, Y. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 35235 to 35238[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sastre, M., Steiner, H., Fuchs, K., Capell, A., Multhaup, G., Condron, M. M., Teplow, D. B., and Haass, C. (2001) EMBO Rep. 2, 835 to 841[Abstract/Free Full Text] Cao, X., and Sudhof, T. C. (2001) Science 293, 115 to 120[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kimberly, W. T., Zheng, J. B., Guenette, S. Y., and Selkoe, D. J. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 40288 to 40292[Abstract/Free Full Text] De Strooper, B., Annaert, W., Cupers, P., Saftig, P., Craessaerts, K., Mumm, J. S., Schroeter, E. H., Schrijvers, V., Wolfe, M. S., Ray, W. J., Goate, A., and Kopan, R. (1999) Nature 398, 518 to 522[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Okochi, M., Steiner, H., Fukumori, A., Tanii, H., Tomita, T., Tanaka, T., Iwatsubo, T., Kudo, T., Takeda, M., and Haass, C. (2002) EMBO J. 21, 5408 to 5416[Abstract/Free Full Text] Esler, W. P., Kimberly, W. T., Ostaszewski, B. L., Diehl, T. S., Moore, C. L., Tsai, J. Y., Rahmati, T., Xia, W. M., Selkoe, D. J., and Wolfe, M. S. (2000) Nat. Cell Biol. 2, 428 to 434[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Li, Y. M., Xu, M., Lai, M. T., Huang, Q., Castro, J. L., DiMuzio, M. J., Harrison, T., Lellis, C., Nadin, J. L., Neduvelil, J. G., Register, R. B., Sardana, M. K., Shearman, M. S., Smith, A. L., Shi, X. P., Yin, K. C., Shafer, J. A., and Gardell, S. J. (2000) Nature 405, 689 to 694[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Ratovitski, T., Slunt, H. H., Thinakaran, G., Price, D. L., Sisodia, S. S., and Borchelt, D. R. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 24536 to 24541[Abstract/Free Full Text] Wolfe, M. S., Xia, W., Ostaszewski, B. L., Diehl, T. S., Kimberly, W. T., and Selkoe, D. J. (1999) Nature 398, 513 to 517[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Thinakaran, G., Borchelt, D. R., Lee, M. K., Slunt, H. H., Spitzer, L., Kim, G., Ratovitsky, T., Davenport, F., Nordstedt, C., Seeger, M., Hardy, J., Levey, A. I., Gandy, S. E., Jenkins, N. A., Copeland, N. G., Price, D. L., and Sisodia, S. S. (1996) Neuron 17, 181 to 190[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Seeger, M., Nordstedt, C., Petanceska, S., Kovacs, D. M., Gouras, G. K., Hahne, S., Fraser, P., Levesque, L., Czernik, A. J., George, H. P., Sisodia, S. S., Thinakaran, G., Tanzi, R. E., Greengard, P., and Gandy, S. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 5090 to 5094[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yu, G., Nishimura, M., Arawaka, S., Levita, D., Zhang, L., Tandon, A., Song, Y.-Q., Rogaeva, E., Chen, F., Kawarai, T., Supala, A., Levesque, L., Yu, H., Yang, D.-S., Holmes, E., Milman, P., Liang, Y., Zhang, D. M., Xu, D. H., Sato, C., Rogaev, E., Smith, M., Janues, C., Zhang, Y., Aebersold, R., Farrer, L., Sorbi, S., Bruni, A., Fraser, P., and St. George-Hyslop, P. (2000) Nature 407, 48 to 54[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Edbauer, D., Winkler, E., Haass, C., and Steiner, H. (2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 8666 to 8671[Abstract/Free Full Text] Wang, R., Sweeney, D., Gandy, S. E., and Sisodia, S. S. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 31894 to 31902[Abstract/Free Full Text] Citron, M., Diehl, T. S., Gordon, G., Biere, A. L., Seubert, P., and Selkoe, D. J. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 13170 to 13175[Abstract/Free Full Text] Murphy, M. P., Uljon, S. N., Fraser, P. E., Fauq, A., Lookingbill, H. A., Findlay, K. A., Smith, T. E., Lewis, P. A., McLendon, D. C., Wang, R., and Golde, T. E. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 26277 to 26284[Abstract/Free Full Text] Petit, A., Bihel, F., Alves da Costa, C., Pourquie, O., Checler, F., and Kraus, J. L. (2001) Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 507 to 511[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Moehlmann, T., Winkler, E., Xia, X., Edbauer, D., Murrell, J., Capell, A., Kaether, C., Zheng, H., Ghetti, B., Haass, C., and Steiner, H. (2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 8025 to 8030[Abstract/Free Full Text] Schroeter, E. H., Ilagan, M. X., Brunkan, A. L., Hecimovic, S., Li, Y. M., Xu, M., Lewis, H. D., Saxena, M. T., De Strooper, B., Coonrod, A., Tomita, T., Iwatsubo, T., Moore, C. L., Goate, A., Wolfe, M. S., Shearman, M., and Kopan, R. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 13075 to 13080[Abstract/Free Full Text] Song, W., Nadeau, P., Yuan, M., Yang, X., Shen, J., and Yankner, B. A. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96, 6959 to 6963[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kulic, L., Walter, J., Multhaup, G., Teplow, D. B., Baumeister, R., Romig, H., Capell, A., Steiner, H., and Haass, C. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 5913 to 5918[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chen, F., Gu, Y., Hasegawa, H., Ruan, X., Arawaka, S., Fraser, P., Westaway, D., Mount, H., and St. George-Hyslop, P. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 36521 to 36526[Abstract/Free Full Text] Leem, J. Y., Saura, C. A., Pietrzik, C., Christianson, J., Wanamaker, C., King, L. T., Veselits, M. L., Tomita, T., Gasparini, L., Iwatsubo, T., Xu, H., Green, W. N., Koo, E. H., and Thinakaran, G. (2002) Neurobiol. Dis. 11, 64 to 82[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Murphy, M. P., Hickman, L. J., Eckman, C. B., Uljon, S. N., Wang, R., and Golde, T. E. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 11914 to 11923[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lichtenthaler, S. F., Beher, D., Grimm, H. S., Wang, R., Shearman, M. S., Masters, C. L., and Beyreuther, K. (2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 1365 to 1370[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kimberly, W. T., Esler, W. P., Ye, W., Ostaszewski, B. L., Gao, J., Diehl, T., Selkoe, D. J., and Wolfe, M. S. (2003) Biochemistry 42, 137 to 144[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Lewis, H. D., Perez Revuelta, B. I., Nadin, A., Neduvelil, J. G., Harrison, T., Pollack, S. J., and Shearman, M. S. (2003) Biochemistry 42, 7580 to 7586[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Tian, G., Ghanekar, S. V., Aharony, D., Shenvi, A. B., Jacobs, R. T., Liu, X., and Greenberg, B. D. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 28968 to 28975[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chen, F., Yu, G., Arawaka, S., Nishimura, M., Kawarai, T., Yu, H., Tandon, A., Supala, A., Song, Y. Q., Rogaeva, E., Milman, P., Sato, C., Yu, C., Janus, C., Lee, J., Song, L., Zhang, L., Fraser, P. E., and St George-Hyslop, P. H. (2001) Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 751 to 754[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Kim, S. H., Leem, J. Y., Lah, J. J., Slunt, H. H., Levey, A. I., Thinakaran, G., and Sisodia, S. S. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 43343 to 43350[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yu, C., Kim, S. H., Ikeuchi, T., Xu, H., Gasparini, L., Wang, R., and Sisodia, S. S. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 43756 to 43760[Abstract/Free Full Text] Taniguchi, Y., Karlstrom, H., Lundkvist, J., Mizutani, T., Otaka, A., Vestling, M., Bernstein, A., Donoviel, D., Lendahl, U., and Honjo, T. (2002) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 4014 to 4019[Abstract/Free Full Text] De Strooper, B. (2003) Neuron 38, 9 to 12[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Cervantes, S., Gonzalez-Duarte, R., and Marfany, G. (2001) FEBS Lett. 505, 81 to 86[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Hebert, S. S., Godin, C., and Levesque, G. (2003) FEBS Lett. 550, 30 to 34[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Hebert, S. S., Godin, C., Tomiyama, T., Mori, H., and Levesque, G. (2003) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 301, 119 to 126[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Stagljar, I., Korostensky, C., Johnsson, N., and teHeesen, S. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 5187 to 5192[Abstract/Free Full Text] Cols, N., Marfany, G., Atrian, S., and Gonzalez-Duarte, R. (1993) FEBS Lett. 319, 90 to 94[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Struhl, G., and Adachi, A. (1998) Cell 93, 649 to 660[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Karlstrom, H., Bergman, A., Lendahl, U., Naslund, J., and Lundkvist, J. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 6763 to 6766[Abstract/Free Full Text] Takasugi, N., Takahashi, Y., Morohashi, Y., Tomita, T., and Iwatsubo, T. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 50198 to 50205[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kawarabayashi, T., Shoji, M., Sato, M., Sasaki, A., Ho, L., Eckman, C. B., Prada, C. M., Younkin, S. G., Kobayashi, T., Tada, N., Matsubara, E., Iizuka, T., Harigaya, Y., Kasai, K., and Hirai, S. (1996) Neurobiol. Aging 17, 215 to 222[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Johnson-Wood, K., Lee, M., Motter, R., Hu, K., Gordon, G., Barbour, R., Khan, K., Gordon, M., Tan, H., Games, D., Lieberburg, I., Schenk, D., Seubert, P., and McConlogue, L. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 1550 to 1555[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yu, H., Saura, C. A., Choi, S. Y., Sun, L. D., Yang, X., Handler, M., Kawarabayashi, T., Younkin, L., Fedeles, B., Wilson, M. A., Younkin, S., Kandel, E. R., Kirkwood, A., and Shen, J. (2001) Neuron 31, 713 to 726[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Goo, J. H., and Park, W. J. (2004) DNA Cell Biol. 23, 59 to 65[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Wang, J., Brunkan, A. L., Hecimovic, S., Walker, E., and Goate, A. (2004) Neurobiol. Dis. 15, 654 to 666[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Laudon, H., Mathews, P. M., Karlstrom, H., Bergman, A., Farmery, M. R., Nixon, R. A., Winblad, B., Gandy, S. E., Lendahl, U., Lundkvist, J., and Naslund, J. (2004) J. Neurochem. 89, 44 to 53[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Laudon, H., Karlstrom, H., Mathews, P. M., Farmery, M. R., Gandy, S. E., Lundkvist, J., Lendahl, U., and Naslund, J. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 23925 to 23932[Abstract/Free Full Text] Haass, C., and Steiner, H. (2002) Trends Cell Biol. 12, 556 to 562[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Steiner, H., Romig, H., Pesold, B., Philipp, U., Baader, M., Citron, M., Loetscher, H., Jacobsen, H., and Haass, C. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 14600 to 14605[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Capell, A., Kaether, C., Edbauer, D., Shirotani, K., Merkl, S., Steiner, H., and Haass, C. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 52519 to 52523[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lee, S. F., Shah, S., Yu, C., Wigley, C., Li, H., Lim, M., Pedersen, K., Han, W., Thomas, P., Lundkvist, J., Hao, Y. H., and Yu, G. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 4144 to 4152[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Morais, V. A., Crystal, A. S., Pijak, D. S., Carlin, D., Costa, J., Lee, V. M., and Doms, R. W. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 43284 to 43291[Abstract/Free Full Text] Knappenberger, K. S., Tian, G., Ye, X., Sobotka-Briner, C., Ghanekar, S. V., Greenberg, B. D., Scott, C.W. (2004) Biochemistry 43, 6208 to 6218[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Tomita, T., Watabiki, T., Takikawa, R., Morohashi, Y., Takasugi, N., Kopan, R., De Strooper, B., and Iwatsubo, T. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 33273 to 33281[Abstract/Free Full Text] Capell, A., Steiner, H., Romig, H., Keck, S., Baader, M., Grim, M. G., Baumeister, R., and Haass, C. (2000) Nat. Cell Biol. 2, 205 to 211[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Saura, C. A., Tomita, T., Davenport, F., Harris, C. L., Iwatsubo, T., and Thinakaran, G. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 13818 to 13823[Abstract/Free Full Text] Levitan, D., Lee, J., Song, L., Manning, R., Wong, G., Parker, E., and Zhang, L. (2001) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98, 12186 to 12190[Abstract/Free Full Text] Annaert, W. G., Esselens, C., Baert, V., Boeve, C., Snellings, G., Cupers, P., Craessaerts, K., and De Strooper, B. (2001) Neuron 32, 579 to 589[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Kornilova, A. Y., Das, C., and Wolfe, M. S. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 16470 to 16473[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ramdya, P., Skoch, J., Bacskai, B. J., Hyman, B. T., and Berezovska, O. (2003) J. Neurochem. 87, 843 to 850[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Wolfe, M. S., and Selkoe, D. J. (2002) Science 296, 2156 to 2157[Free Full Text] Brown, M. S., Ye, J., Rawson, R. B., and Goldstein, J. L. (2000) Cell 100, 391 to 398[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Nyborg, A. C., Kornilova, A. Y., Jansen, K., Ladd, T. B., Wolfe, M. S., and Golde, T. E. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 15153 to 15160[Abstract/Free Full Text]
