The Synergistic Effect of Dexamethasone and All-trans-retinoic Acid on Hepatic Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase Gene Expression Involves the Coactivator p300* Xiaohui L. Wang, Birger Herzog, Mary Waltner-Law, Robert K. Hall, Masakazu Shiota, and Daryl K. Granner
From the Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615 and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37212
Received for publication, March 29, 2004 , and in revised form, May 25, 2004.
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Activation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene transcription in response to all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) or a glucocorticoid such as dexamethasone (Dex) requires a distinct arrangement of DNA-response elements and their cognate transcription activators on the gene promoter. Two of the accessory factor-binding elements involved in the Dex response (gAF1 and gAF3) coincide with the DNA-response elements involved in the RA response. We demonstrate here that the combination of Dex/RA has a synergistic effect on endogenous PEPCK gene expression in rat hepatocytes and H4IIE hepatoma cells. Reporter gene studies show that the gAF3 element and one of the two glucocorticoid receptor-binding elements (GR1) are most important for this effect. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that when H4IIE cells were treated with Dex/RA, ligand-activated retinoic acid receptors (retinoic acid receptor/retinoid X receptor) and glucocorticoid receptors are recruited to this gene promoter, as are the transcription coregulators p300, CREB-binding protein, p/CIP, and SRC-1. Notably, the recruitment of p300 and RNA polymerase II to the PEPCK promoter is increased by the combined Dex/RA treatment compared with Dex or RA treatment alone. The functional importance of p300 in the Dex/RA response is illustrated by the observation that selective reduction of this coactivator, but not that of CREB-binding protein, abolishes the synergistic effect in H4IIE cells.
   INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Extracellular signals received by eucaryotic cells are transferred to the nucleus where the transcription of specific sets of genes is modulated (1). The final targets of these signaling pathways are different combinations of transcription factors that bind to DNA-response elements and form various protein-protein interactions on gene promoters and thereby either activate or repress gene transcription. DNA-response elements in gene promoters often overlap or are adjacent to one another (2). This provides various possibilities for the recruitment of transcription factors and their cognate coregulators in response to distinct signals and creates the potential for considerable flexibility in gene regulation. Regulation of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK)1 gene provides an excellent model system for exploring the mechanisms of signal integration in the context of gluconeogenesis, an important physiologic process (2). The expression of hepatic PEPCK is primarily accomplished at the transcriptional level (3). Glucagon (acting through cAMP), glucocorticoids, all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), and thyroid hormone activate PEPCK gene expression, whereas insulin and glucose are inhibitory (3 to 6).
Activation of PEPCK gene transcription by RA occurs through a multicomponent retinoic acid-response unit (RARU) that consists of two separate retinoic acid-response elements, RARE1 and RARE2, each of which binds an RAR/RXR heterodimer (4, 7). Activation of PEPCK gene transcription by Dex also requires a multicomponent glucocorticoid-response unit (GRU), which consists of two nonconsensus glucocorticoid receptor-binding sites (GR1 and GR2) (8), and four accessory factor-binding sites (gAF1, gAF2, gAF3, and the cAMP-response element (CRE)), which bind COUP-TF/HNF4, HNF3, COUP-TF, and C/EBP, respectively (9 to 12). A mutation of any one of the accessory elements results in a 50 to 60% reduction of Dex-induced PEPCK gene transcription in H4IIE hepatoma cells (11). Any combination of the mutation of two elements nearly abolishes this response (11).
Most interesting, RARE1 and RARE2 in the RARU are coincident with gAF1 and gAF3 in the GRU (4, 7, 9, 13). The respective transcription factors are present in about the same abundance in the H4IIE cell nucleus, and each binds with approximately the same affinity to these elements. Thus, it is of interest to understand how a cell responds to either of these inducers, whether different constellations of accessory factors and coregulators are used for each response and whether there is any functional interaction between the two units in the presence of both ligands.
In this study, we demonstrate that the Dex/RA combination has a synergistic effect on endogenous PEPCK gene expression in both primary hepatocytes and H4IIE hepatoma cells. This response is most dependent on the gAF3 and GR1 elements. Upon treatment with Dex/RA, ligand-activated RAR/RXR heterodimers, GR, HNF3, HNF4, p/CIP, SRC-1, CBP, p300, and RNA polymerase II (pol II) are present on the PEPCK gene promoter. Notably, the recruitment of p300 and pol II on the PEPCK promoter is increased upon Dex/RA treatment. The important role of p300 is illustrated by the fact that its reduction results in a selective loss of the synergistic effect of Dex/RA, whereas a similar reduction of CBP has no effect.
   MATERIALS AND METHODS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Plasmids The PEPCK luciferase (PEPCK-LUC) reporter gene construct was made by cloning the PEPCK gene promoter ( to 467 to +69) into pGL3 basic (Promega), as described previously (14). The gAF1-Gal4 PEPCK-LUC, gAF2-Gal4 PEPCK-LUC, or gAF3-Gal4 PEPCK-LUC reporter constructs were constructed by replacing gAF1, gAF2, or gAF3 with a Gal4 DNA-binding element, as described previously (15). gAF1 gAF3-Gal4 PEPCK-LUC was constructed by further mutating the gAF1 element of gAF3-Gal4 PEPCK-LUC plasmid to a Gal4 DNA-binding element using the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene). The sequence of the Gal4 DNA-binding element is 5'-CGGAGGACTGTCCTCCGACCA-3'. gAF3m PEPCK-LUC, gAF3m PEPCK-LUC, gAF3Em PEPCK-LUC, gAF1-COUP-TF PEPCK-LUC, and gAF1-HNF4 PEPCK-LUC were made as described previously (15). mGR1 PEPCK-LUC and palGR1 PEPCK-LUC were made by converting the GR1 element to a block mutation or palindromic GRbinding element, respectively. mGR2 PEPCK-LUC was constructed by replacing the GR2 site with a block mutation. mGR1/2 PEPCK-LUC was made by replacing the GR1 site in mGR2 PEPCK-LUC with a block mutation. The oligonucleotides used to construct mGR1, mGR2, and palGR1 were described previously (8). gAF1-cRARE PEPCK-LUC or gAF3-cRARE PEPCK-LUC was made by replacing gAF1 or gAF3 element individually with a consensus retinoic acid receptor-binding element (cRARE) (16). The oligonucleotides used to generate gAF1-cRARE PEPCK-LUC and gAF3-cRARE PEPCK-LUC are as follows: gAF1-cRARE, 5'-ATTCCCTTCTGGTTCACCGAAAGTTCAGGAGTGACACC-3', and gAF3-cRARE, 5'-CGTCCCGGCCGGTTCACCGAAAGTTCACCACCTGACAA-3'. The sequence of all of the constructs was verified by DNA sequence analysis.
Cell Culture and Transfection H4IIE hepatoma cells were grown in stationary culture in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum at 37  degrees C in 5% CO2. Transfection was performed using the calcium phosphate precipitation method as described previously (17) using 10  microg of a reporter plasmid (wild type or mutations of PEPCK-LUC). The cells were subsequently washed and incubated for 18 h in DMEM containing 500 nM dexamethasone (Dex) and/or 5  microM all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) (Sigma). Cells were harvested by trypsin digestion and resuspended in 200  microl of lysis buffer (Promega). Firefly luciferase activity was measured and corrected for transfection efficiency with Renilla luciferase activity using the dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega).
H4IIE cells are transfected with  < 1% efficiency; therefore, a rat kidney fibroblast cell line, KNRK cells, was employed. These cells express abundant amounts of p300 and CBP and are transfected with 80% efficiency, as measured by the expression of enhanced green fluorescent proteins. They are therefore very useful in establishing the efficacy and selectivity of candidate siRNA molecules. KNRK cells were grown at 37  degrees C in DMEM supplemented with 5% calf serum, nonessential amino acids, and 4.5 g/liter glucose. These cells were cultured in 6-well plates for 24 h and transfected with LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen). 2  microg of the siRNA vectors were transfected into 0.5 x 106 cells, and 0.5  microg of enhanced green fluorescent proteins were cotransfected as a control for transfection efficiency. Control cells were transfected with empty pSUPER vector. Cells were assayed for p300 or CBP expression 72 h after transfection by using Western blot assays of cell lysates. -Actin was used to control for any differences in cell numbers or protein loading.
Real Time PCR Primary hepatocytes were deprived of serum overnight and then were either left untreated or were treated with 500 nM Dex and/or 5  microM RA for 4 h. Total RNA was extracted from these cells, and 0.5  microg of this was transcribed using 50 units of Taqman reverse transcriptase (Applied Biosystems) and 125  microM random hexamer primers. Real time PCR reactions were performed on one-tenth of the reverse-transcribed RNA using primers specific for the PEPCK and cyclophilin genes. A 50- microl master mix of the following reaction components was prepared for each real time PCR: 18  microl of water, 100 nM forward primer, 100 nM reverse primer, 25  microl of 2x SYBR Green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems), and 5  microl (one-tenth) of the reverse-transcribed RNA. The sequence of the forward PEPCK primer was 5'-GAATCAGCCAGATGTAATCCCG-3', and the sequence of the reverse PEPCK primer was 5'-CATTGTGCTTGCTGGTTTGC-3'. The sequence of the forward cyclophilin primer was 5'-AAGGTGAAAGAAGGCATGAGCA-3', and the sequence of the reverse cyclophilin primer was 5'-AGTTGTCCACAGTCGGAGATGG-3'. The following real time PCR protocol was used: denaturation and enzyme activation at 95  degrees C for 10 min followed by a two-step amplification and quantification program consisting of 40 cycles of denaturation for 15 s at 95  degrees C and annealing/extension for 1 min at 60  degrees C. Data were analyzed using the SDS version 1.7a Installer software package.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assays (ChIP) H4IIE cells (1 x 108 cells per treatment) were kept in serum-free DMEM at 37  degrees C in 5% CO2 for about 48 h. After a 2-h hormone treatment, protein-DNA cross-linking was performed with 1% formaldehyde in serum-free DMEM at room temperature for 10 min. The cells were then harvested into PBS buffer (ice-cold 1x PBS with protease inhibitors: 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1  microg/ml aprotinin, 1  microg/ml leupeptin, 1  microg/ml pepstatin). The cells were then pelleted and resuspended in SDS lysis buffer (1% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, with protease inhibitors). After incubation on ice for 20 min, the lysates were mixed with 25- microm-diameter glass beads (MO-SCI Corp.) and sonicated (VirSonic; 2.5-mm tip) at 4  degrees C 10 times with 15-s pulses at a setting of 6 (output of 6 watts) to shear chromatin to 500-bp fragments. The supernatant from each sample was divided into aliquots for a subsequent 10-fold dilution in ChIP dilution buffer (0.01% SDS, 1.1% Triton X-100, 1.2 mM EDTA, pH 8, 16.7 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, with protease inhibitors). Each sample was pre-cleared to reduce nonspecific background using 40  microl of a 1:1 protein A/G-agarose slurry (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) supplemented with 100  microg/ml salmon sperm DNA (Stratagene) for 3 h at 4  degrees C on a rotating wheel. The beads were then pelleted, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The precleared extracts were incubated overnight with 4  microg of the antibody or without antibody (as a negative control) at 4  degrees C on a rotating wheel. Immune complexes were collected using 40  microl of a 1:1 protein-A/G-agarose slurry plus 100  microg/ml salmon sperm DNA, with constant rotation for 3 h at 4  degrees C. The agarose beads were pelleted at 1000 x g for 2 min and washed for 10 min at room temperature with 1 ml of each of the following buffers in succession: low salt wash buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8), high salt wash buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, pH 8, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 500 mM NaCl, pH 8), LiCl wash buffer (0.25 M LiCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8), and 2x with TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8). Chromatin complexes were eluted from the beads by two 1-h incubations with 160  microl of elution buffer (1% SDS, 0.1 M NaHCO3) at room temperature. The DNA-protein cross-links were reversed by incubating the samples at 65  degrees C for 12 h. The RNA and protein in the samples were digested using an RNase mixture (Ambion) and 50  microg/ml proteinase K, respectively. The DNA was purified using the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and resuspended in 50  microl of nuclease-free water. Five microliter aliquots were used for each PCR or real time PCR utilizing primers specific for PEPCK or -actin promoters. The forward primer used for the PEPCK gene promoter was 5'-GTTTCACGTCTCAGAGCTGA-3'; the reverse primer was 5'-ACCGTGACTGTTGCTGATGC-3'. The forward and reverse primers used for the -actin gene promoter were described previously (18). PCR products were run on a 2% agarose gel and visualized by ethidium bromide staining. Real time PCR was performed as described above. The antibodies used for GR, RAR, RXR, HNF3, HNF4, PCAF, p300, CBP, SRC-1, and p/CIP were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA); anti-RNA polymerase II was from Berkeley Antibody Co. (Richmond, CA).
Small Interfering RNA The mammalian vector pSUPER was used for the expression of siRNAs specifically targeted against rat p300 and CBP mRNAs. The pSUPER vector consists of an H1-RNA promoter, which directs the synthesis of siRNA transcripts (19). The target sequence of the p300 mRNA is a 21-nucleotide sequence corresponding to nucleotide positions 88 to 108 downstream from the transcription start site of this gene, which is separated by a 9-nucleotide noncomplementary spacer sequence followed by the reverse complement of the same 21-nucleotide sequence. The cloning of the sequence was facilitated by BamHI and HindIII flanking sites. This vector is referred to as p300 siRNA. The siRNA specific for CBP was made in a similar way by using a 21-nucleotide sequence corresponding to nucleotide positions 122 to 142 downstream of the transcription start site of this gene; the resulting vector is referred to as CBP siRNA.
Western Blot Analysis siRNA-treated KNRK cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS. These cells were disrupted in a detergent lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 20 mM Na4P2O7, 0.2% Triton X-100, 10 nM microcystin, 0.1% -mercaptoethanol, 0.1 M phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1  microg/ml aprotinin, 1  microg/ml pepstatin, and 1  microg/ml leupeptin). A 40- microg aliquot of protein from each treatment was loaded on a 6% Tris-glycine gel (Invitrogen). After electrophoresis, the separated proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Invitrogen). The membrane was incubated for 2 h with the appropriate antibody, followed by incubation with an anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG conjugated to horseradish peroxidase. Immunoreactive proteins were detected using the ECL immunodetection system (Amersham Biosciences). To assess the specificity of siRNA, the membrane probed with p300 antibody was re-probed with CBP antibody and vice versa.
Statistical Analysis Statistical analyses were performed using Student's t test, with the significance level set at p  <  0.05.
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Dexamethasone and Retinoic Acid Have a Synergistic Effect on PEPCK Gene Expression Dexamethasone (Dex) and retinoic acid (RA) each induce transcription of the PEPCK gene in H4IIE hepatoma cells through some shared DNA elements (2, 4, 7, 9, 13). This is not a clonal cell line (20), so it is possible that different populations of cells in a culture respond to each inducer. If so, the summed responses to the two ligands should be additive. To determine the effect of the Dex/RA combination on PEPCK gene expression, real time RT-PCR assays were performed to quantify PEPCK mRNA upon Dex and/or RA treatment. Cyclophilin mRNA was also measured as a normalization control. RA and Dex caused a 4- and 2.7-fold induction, respectively, and the combination resulted in a synergistic 13.3-fold effect in H4IIE cells (Fig. 1A). In rat primary hepatocytes, PEPCK mRNA is induced 15- and 7.4-fold upon treatment with RA or Dex, respectively. When both ligands are present, a much greater than additive 39-fold induction was observed (Fig. 1B). This indication of an effect on mRNA induction within a single population of cells was confirmed at the protein level in an immunofluorescent experiment performed on primary hepatocytes. PEPCK expression is induced in 71, 67, or 70% of hepatocytes upon treatment with RA, Dex, or Dex/RA, respectively (data not shown). Because more than 50% of the cells respond to treatment with either or both ligands, we conclude that there are no discrete populations of hepatocytes that respond to either Dex or RA or to the combination. Also, in keeping with the observations noted in Fig. 1B, the intensity of staining was greater in the cells treated with the Dex/RA combination (data not shown).
View larger version (20K):    FIG. 1. Regulation of PEPCK gene expression by Dex/RA in rat primary hepatocytes and H4IIE hepatoma cells. A, H4IIE cells were serum-deprived overnight, and then were either left untreated or were treated with 500 nM Dex and/or 5  microM RA for 4 h. Total RNA was extracted from these cells, and 0.5  microg of RNA was subjected to reverse-transcription. Real time PCRs were performed on the reverse-transcribed RNA using primers encoding cDNA sequences for PEPCK and cyclophilin, as described under "Materials and Methods." B, the experiment described in A was performed using isolated rat hepatocytes. Data were analyzed using the SDS version 1.7a Installer software package. Results represent the means  plus or minus  S.E. of four to six independent experiments. The horizontal bar in the Dex/RA column in this and other figures indicates the value that would have been achieved if the result was additive.
  RAR/RXR Heterodimers at the gAF3 Element Are Primarily Involved in the Synergistic Effect The involvement of specific cis-elements and their cognate transcription factors in this synergistic effect was defined by using a number of variations of the PEPCK-LUC reporter plasmid, which contains the wild type PEPCK promoter from  to 467 to +69 ligated to the luciferase reporter gene. Upon treatment of H4IIE cells with 5  microM RA, 500 nM Dex, or a combination of the two, PEPCK promoter-driven luciferase reporter gene expression is induced 3.4-, 8.6-, and 16.3-fold, respectively (see Fig. 2). This greater than additive response is qualitatively similar to that noted in expression of the endogenous gene (see Fig. 1A); hence, this transient transcription approach can be used to define the DNA elements and associated transcription factors involved in this response.
View larger version (35K):    FIG. 2. The gAF3 element is primarily involved in the synergistic effect. Mutations of PEPCK-LUC that replace gAF1, gAF2, or gAF3 with a Gal4 DNA-binding element(s) individually, or gAF1 and gAF3 in combination, were made. H4IIE cells were transfected with 10  microg of a reporter plasmid (wild type or mutated forms of PEPCK-LUC) and 100 ng of PRL-SV40 Renilla luciferase vector as a control for transfection efficiency. Cells were left untreated or were treated with 500 nM Dex and/or 5  microM RA for 18 h, and cell lysates were prepared for dual luciferase assays as described under "Materials and Methods." Data represent the mean  plus or minus  S.E. of five to eight independent experiments. Results illustrated are normalized to the basal activity of each PEPCK-LUC reporter gene construct.
  Mutations of PEPCK-LUC that replace gAF1, gAF2, or gAF3 with a Gal4 DNA-binding element(s) individually, or gAF1 and gAF3 in combination, were made to identify the involvement of these accessory elements in the synergistic effect. Results consistent with previously published data from our laboratory show that any single mutation of these three gAFs reduces the Dex-induced response by about 50%, and the mutation of both gAF1 and gAF3 abolishes the response (Fig. 2) (11). By contrast, the major effect of RA is facilitated through gAF3, although a small effect is mediated through gAF1. gAF2 is not involved in the RA effect, as noted earlier (13). Correspondingly, gAF2 has no qualitative effect on the synergistic response (the total effect is reduced because of the decreased response to Dex), whereas both gAF1, and especially gAF3, have major effects (Fig. 2).
The gAF1 element was converted to a consensus binding element for either HNF4 or COUP-TF which do not bind RXR (9). In accordance with a previous observation, the presence of consensus HNF4- or COUP-TF-binding elements at gAF1 decreases the RA-induced response by about 50% (Fig. 3) (7). A significant synergistic effect of Dex/RA was not achieved from these constructs. However, the presence of a consensus RAR/RXR-binding element (cRARE) at gAF1, which excludes HNF4 or COUP-TF binding, promotes a significant increase of the RA response but reduces the Dex response by about 50% (Fig. 3). Nonetheless, the synergistic effect is fully supported when gAF1 is replaced by a cRARE (gAF1-cRARE PEPCK-LUC).
View larger version (34K):    FIG. 3. cRARE at gAF1 restores the synergistic effect. H4IIE cells were transiently transfected with 10  microg of wild type PEPCK-LUC or mutated forms of PEPCK-LUC in which the gAF1 element was replaced with a consensus binding element for either an HNF4, COUP-TF homodimer, or RAR/RXR heterodimers. Cells were left untreated or were treated with 500 nM Dex and/or 5  microM RA for 18 h. Dual luciferase assays were performed as described under "Materials and Methods." The results illustrated are normalized to the basal activity of each PEPCK-LUC reporter gene construct. Data represent the mean  plus or minus  S.E. of five to eight independent experiments.
  The gAF3 element includes two RAR/RXR sites, and , separated by a 5-bp linker sequence (see Fig. 4). An E box, which binds the transcription factor USF, is located immediately downstream (Fig. 4). The and elements, and the E box, were mutated in the context of PEPCK-LUC to determine which component of gAF3 is involved in the synergistic effect. As expected from previous studies (11), the E box mutation does not affect either of the Dex or RA responses nor does it have an effect on the Dex/RA response. A mutation of the site slightly reduces the RA-induced response but has no significant effect on the Dex-induced response or on the Dex/RA-induced synergistic effect. By contrast, a mutation of the site of gAF3 significantly reduces both the RA and Dex effects and abolishes the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression (Fig. 4). These data indicate that transcription factors binding to the site of gAF3 mediate the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression.
View larger version (33K):    FIG. 4. The element in gAF3 is important for the synergistic effect of Dex/RA. The components of gAF3 are illustrated in the top panel. Transfection experiments were performed, as described in Fig. 2, in H4IIE cells by using variations of PEPCK-LUC in which the , elements of gAF3, and the E box, were individually mutated. The results illustrated are normalized to the basal activity of each PEPCK-LUC reporter gene construct. Data represent the mean  plus or minus  S.E. of five to eight independent experiments.
  The approach employed in the experiment described in Fig. 3 was used to infer the binding of transcription factors to the gAF3 element upon Dex/RA treatment (Fig. 5). The full synergistic effect was supported only when gAF3 was converted to a cRARE (gAF3-cRARE PEPCK-LUC). The cRARE binds RAR/RXR heterodimers with a higher affinity than either HNF4 or COUP-TF (16), thus the RA response in a construct in which gAF3 was changed to a consensus RAR/RXR-binding element is greater than that obtained from the wild type PEPCK-LUC (12-fold versus 3.4-fold; Fig. 5). The response of constructs in which both gAF1 and gAF3 were converted to cRAREs (gAF1/gAF3-cRARE PEPCK-LUC) was similar to that of gAF3-cRARE PEPCK-LUC (data not shown). This implies that gAF3 is more important than gAF1 in promoting the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression and that ligand-bound RAR/RXR heterodimers play a critical role.
View larger version (31K):    FIG. 5. cRARE at gAF3 restores the synergistic effect. H4IIE cells were transiently transfected with 10  microg of PEPCK-LUC or mutated forms of PEPCK-LUC in which the gAF3 element was replaced with a consensus binding element for RAR/RXR heterodimers or a Gal4 DNA-binding element. Cells were left untreated or were treated with 500 nM Dex and/or 5  microM RA for 18 h. Dual luciferase assays were performed as described under "Materials and Methods." The results illustrated are normalized to the basal activity of each PEPCK-LUC reporter construct. Data are presented as the mean  plus or minus  S.E. of five to eight independent experiments.
  The GR1 Glucocorticoid Receptor-binding Site Is Involved in the Synergistic Effect Block mutations of GR1 and/or GR2, which prevent the binding of GR, were made in the context of the PEPCK-LUC construct. The GR1 mutant (mGR1 in Fig. 6) reduces Dex-induced PEPCK gene expression by 60%, whereas mGR2 has little effect, as expected (Fig. 6). The synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression is totally abolished in mGR1 but is not affected by mGR2 (Fig. 6). These results indicate that GR1, but not GR2, is involved in the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression, which is consistent with our previous report (8) that GR1 is more important for Dex-induced PEPCK gene expression.
View larger version (37K):    FIG. 6. GR1 is involved in the synergistic effect. PEPCK-LUC constructs were made that contain a mutated GR1 (mGR1), a mutated GR2 (mGR2), a combined mutation of GR1 and GR2 (mGR1/2), or a palindromic GR-binding element (pal GR1). H4IIE cells were transiently transfected with 10  microg of PEPCK-LUC or mutant forms of PEPCK-LUC. The results illustrated are normalized to the basal activity of each PEPCK-LUC reporter gene construct. Data represent the mean  plus or minus  S.E. of five to eight independent experiments.
  GR1 is a weak, nonconsensus GR-binding site which, by itself, cannot induce a Dex response on PEPCK gene expression (8). The accessory factor elements gAF1 to gAF3, with associated transcription factors, increase the affinity of binding of liganded GR to GR1/GR2 and stabilize this binding (21). The gAF1 and gAF3 accessory elements are not necessary when GR1/GR2 are replaced with high affinity, palindromic GR-binding elements (21). To test whether ligand-activated RAR/RXR heterodimers are necessary in the presence of a high affinity GR-binding element, GR1 was converted to a palindromic glucocorticoid-response element (palGRE) in the context of PEPCK-LUC. PEPCK luciferase activity is induced 80-fold by Dex in the context of palGR1 PEPCK-LUC, but when both Dex and RA are present, PEPCK gene expression is not further augmented (Fig. 6). Most interesting, the synergistic effect of Dex/RA is not seen when GR1 is converted to a palindromic high affinity GR-binding site, which is independent of gAF1 and gAF3 (8). By contrast, when either gAF1 or gAF3 is converted to a consensus RAR/RXR-binding element, in the context of the wild type GR1/GR2 elements, the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression is actually augmented (see Figs. 3 and 5). Taken together, we conclude that the synergistic effect of Dex/RA involves enhanced GR binding to the nonconsensus GR1 element and that this may be facilitated by the binding of RAR/RXR heterodimers.
Dex/RA Treatment Affects the Binding of Transcription Factors to the PEPCK Gene Promoter in Vivo ChIPs were performed in untreated and hormone-treated H4IIE cells to identify the in vivo binding profile of accessory factors, nuclear receptors, and coregulators to the PEPCK gene promoter. GR is only recruited to the PEPCK gene promoter when Dex is present (1- versus 13.0-fold), as shown previously (Fig. 7 and Table I) (18). This association is increased by the combined Dex/RA treatment (13.0 versus 21.2; Fig. 7, Table I), which is consistent with the functional data illustrated above. This leads us to hypothesize that RAR/RXR heterodimers enhance GR binding/function.
View larger version (28K):    FIG. 7. GR, RAR/RXR, HNF3, and HNF4 are present on the PEPCK gene promoter upon treatment with Dex/RA. A, the association of GR, RAR, RXR, HNF3, and HNF4 with the endogenous PEPCK gene promoter was measured by ChIP in H4IIE cells treated for 2 h under the following conditions: no hormone, 5  microM RA, 500 nM Dex, or 500 nM Dex/5  microM RA. No Ab lanes show the results of immunoprecipitations performed in parallel without the application of primary antibodies. Input lanes show the results from samples not subjected to immunoprecipitation. B, the association of GR, RAR, RXR, HNF3, and HNF4 with the endogenous -actin gene promoter was measured by ChIP, as a negative control. Results are representative of four to six independent experiments.
 
View this table:    TABLE I The occupancy of the PEPCK gene promoter by transcription factors and coregulators changes upon treatment with Dex and/or RA
The numbers shown are derived from quantitative real time PCR analysis of PEPCK promoter fragments co-immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibody after ChIP. The data are expressed as the fold difference relative to the control (untreated) samples from four to six independent assays.
  In some genes RA is thought to bind to DNA-bound RAR/RXR heterodimers, and the RA-RAR interaction results in the release of a corepressor complex and the subsequent association of a coactivator complex (22, 23). There is a significant association of RAR and RXR to the PEPCK gene promoter in the absence of ligand, but there is a substantial increase of binding of both (2-fold increase) when RA is added to the cells (Fig. 7). This association is not increased by the concomitant administration of Dex.
HNF3 binds to the PEPCK gene promoter constitutively, presumably to gAF2 (Fig. 7) (10, 18), which is consistent with functional data in which we have shown that this element is not involved in either the RA or Dex/RA-induced synergistic responses on PEPCK gene expression (Fig. 2). HNF4 is also bound to the PEPCK gene promoter in untreated cells and in cells treated with Dex and/or RA (Fig. 7).
SRC-1 and p/CIP, members of the p160 nuclear receptor family, are recruited to the PEPCK gene promoter upon treatment with Dex and/or RA (Fig. 8). Although Dex causes a somewhat greater recruitment of SRC-1 and p/CIP to the PEPCK gene promoter than RA (3.5- versus 2-fold and 2.8- versus 2-fold, respectively, Table I), the recruitment of these proteins is not further increased when both ligands are present. PCAF, a HAT family protein, is present in H4IIE cells but is not located on the PEPCK gene promoter under any of these treatment conditions. This is probably not due to epitope masking, as antibodies specific for different epitopes of PCAF were used. CBP and p300 are both recruited to the PEPCK gene promoter upon Dex and/or RA treatment but, despite their structural homology, the binding of CBP and p300 differs. The recruitment of CBP is induced 3.7- and 6.9-fold upon treatment with Dex or RA, respectively (Fig. 8 and Table I). The recruitment of CBP is not further increased (6.5-fold) by combined treatment with Dex/RA. By contrast, recruitment of p300 is increased 4.7-fold upon treatment with Dex/RA combination as compared with an 2.0-fold increase upon treatment with either RA or Dex alone, respectively. Antibodies specific for different epitopes of CBP and p300 were also used in this experiment, and similar recruitment profiles of CBP and p300 were observed in each case (data not shown). The increased recruitment of RNA pol II (2-, 2-, and 5-fold upon treatment with RA, Dex, and RA/Dex, respectively) parallels the change in p300 binding (Fig. 8). Similar changes in the binding patterns of these nuclear proteins were noted in primary hepatocytes (data not shown).
View larger version (32K):    FIG. 8. Recruitment of p300 to the PEPCK gene promoter is increased upon treatment with Dex/RA. A, the association of PCAF, SRC-1, p/CIP, CBP, p300, and pol II with the endogenous PEPCK gene promoter was measured by ChIP in H4IIE cells treated for 2 h under the following conditions: no hormone, 5  microM RA, 500 nM Dex, or 500 nM Dex/5  microM RA. No Ab lanes show the results of immunoprecipitations performed in parallel without the application of primary antibodies. Input lanes show the results from samples not subjected to immunoprecipitation. B, the association of the above proteins with the endogenous -actin gene promoter was measured by ChIP, as a negative control. Results are representative of four to six independent experiments.
  p300 Is Specifically Involved in the Synergistic Effect The difference in association of p300 and CBP when H4IIE cells are exposed to Dex/RA is interesting in view of the observation that these proteins interact with many transcription factors and nuclear receptors in the regulation of gene transcription and are often considered to be interchangeable. Selective reduction of p300 or CBP was used to establish the role of these proteins in the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression. siRNAs directed against p300 or CBP mRNA were cloned into the pSUPER mammalian expression vector (designated as p300 siRNA and CBP siRNA, respectively). A Western blot analysis, performed using cell lysates prepared 72 h after transfection of these siRNAs into KNRK cells, shows that the siRNA directed against either p300 or CBP mRNA inhibited the endogenous expression of each of these proteins (Fig. 9, A and B). To validate the specificity of the siRNAs, the nitrocellulose membrane used in the p300 analysis was re-blotted with the CBP antibody and vice versa. The p300 siRNA does not affect CBP gene expression, nor does the CBP siRNA affect p300 gene expression. -Actin expression is not affected by either treatment. Thus, the siRNAs cause a major and selective reduction of the cognate proteins.
View larger version (26K):    FIG. 9. Selective reduction of p300, but not CBP, results in a loss of the synergistic effect. A, 2  microg of either the siRNA vector targeted against p300 or the empty pSUPER vector (control) was transiently transfected into rat KNRK cells (see "Materials and Methods"). Cells were assayed for p300 expression 72 h after transfection using Western blot analysis of cell lysates. The nitrocellulose membrane used in the p300 analysis was re-blotted with the CBP antibody to assess the specificity of the siRNA. -Actin was used to control for protein loading. The data shown are representative of four separate experiments. B, a transfection experiment was performed as described in A using an siRNA vector targeted against CBP. The nitrocellulose membrane used in the CBP analysis was re-blotted with the p300 antibody to assess the specificity of the siRNA. C, H4IIE cells were transiently transfected with 10  microg of PEPCK-LUC, 100 ng of PRL-SV40, 0.5  microg of RSV-GR, CMX-RAR, and CMX-RXR expression vectors with 15  microg of either pSUPER alone (control), p300 siRNA, or CBP siRNA for 72 h. Cells were then left untreated or were treated with 500 nM Dex and/or 5  microM RA for 18 h before they were harvested. Dual luciferase assays were performed as described under "Materials and Methods." Results illustrated are normalized to the basal activity of PEPCK-LUC. Data represent the mean  plus or minus  S.E. of four independent experiments.
  H4IIE cells were transfected with PEPCK-LUC, RSV-GR, CMX-RAR, and CMX-RXR expression vectors with either pSUPER alone (control), p300 siRNA, or CBP siRNA. 5  microM RA, 500 nM Dex, or a combination of the two, was added to the cells 18 h before harvest. By using PEPCK-LUC reporter gene expression with Dex/RA treatment as 100%, the induction by RA or Dex is 10 and 65%, respectively (Fig. 9C). This is quantitatively similar to the pattern of endogenous PEPCK gene expression. The Dex-induced response was reduced to 35% of the maximal response in p300 siRNA-transfected H4IIE cells. By contrast, the RA-induced response was not changed. The Dex/RA-induced response is, however, reduced to 37%, which is similar to the reduction of the Dex-induced response. This result indicates that the synergy achieved with Dex/RA is abolished when p300 expression is reduced. The Dex-induced response was also reduced to 29% in CBP siRNA-transfected H4IIE cells, and the RA-induced response was not affected. The Dex/RA-induced response was only reduced to 53%, which is mainly because of the decreased response to Dex; however, the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression still remained (Fig. 9C). These results indicate that p300, but not CBP, is involved in the synergistic effect of Dex/RA on PEPCK gene expression.
   DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   The GRU and RARU in the PEPCK gene promoter consist of several overlapping DNA elements, as described in the Introduction. Although any of these DNA elements and associated factors could be involved in the synergistic action of Dex/RA, it appears that gAF3, and to a lesser extent gAF1, are of most importance, and gAF2 is not involved (Fig. 2). In particular, the site of gAF3, which binds a RAR/RXR heterodimer, is critical (Fig. 4). The role of RAR/RXR binding is supported by the observation that substitution of an element at gAF1, which selectively binds RAR/RXR, promotes synergism, but elements that selectively bind either HNF4 or COUP-TF, which bind to the wild type gAF1, do not (Fig. 3). Finally, the substitution of a consensus RARE at gAF1 (Fig. 3), and especially at gAF3 (Fig. 5), markedly enhances the synergistic effect; the cRARE at gAF3 results in a 4-fold greater synergistic response than that obtained from the wild type promoter (Fig. 5).
The Dex response was reduced by 50 to 60% in the experiment in which a cRARE was substituted for gAF3, which normally binds COUP-TF as an accessory factor in the Dex response (11, 13). Thus, unliganded RAR/RXR, if bound to the cRARE, cannot serve as an accessory factor for the Dex response. However, when RA is added, a robust synergistic effect is obtained, as noted above (and Fig. 5). Although indirect, this suggests that ligand-bound RAR/RXR can serve as an accessory factor in the Dex response.
The role of the accessory factors at gAF1, gAF2, and gAF3 (HNF4/COUP-TF, HNF3, and COUP-TF, respectively) is to increase the affinity of binding of GR to the GR1 element (21). Thus, when GR1 is converted to a high affinity site, gAF1 and gAF3 have no additional effect on GR binding (21). Likewise, when GR1 is converted to a palindromic GRE, PEPCK gene expression is at the maximal rate, and there is no additional or synergistic effect of RA (Fig. 6).
It is reasonable to presume that Dex and RA each induce the formation of unique transcription complexes and that the combination of Dex/RA results in yet another complex. We began an exploration of this topic by using the ChIP assay. As noted previously (18), GR is absent from the PEPCK gene promoter in the absence of ligand. The addition of Dex results in a 13-fold increase in GR occupancy on the promoter (Table I). Small amounts of RAR and RXR appear on the promoter in the absence of ligand; a 2 to 2.5-fold increase in the binding of both occurs after the addition of RA. Interestingly, the Dex/RA combination has no effect on RAR and RXR occupancy, but GR binding increases from 13- to 21-fold. This is in concert with the observation that RAR/RXR acts as an accessory factor to increase the affinity of GR binding and to enhance transcription (Fig. 5). The occupancy of the accessory factors HNF4 and HNF3 is not affected by any treatment, as noted previously (18).
The promoter occupancy of PCAF, SRC-1, p/CIP, p300, and CBP was analyzed under the various hormone treatments. There was no binding of PCAF under any of the treatment conditions (Fig. 8). This was somewhat surprising in view of the observations that RA-activated RAR/RXR heterodimers recruit PCAF to DNA segments that contain the typical DR5 RARE in vitro (26). RA and Dex each recruit p/CIP and SRC-1; however, there is no additional binding when the Dex/RA combination is employed. Indeed, the binding of these p160 family members is the same in Dex/RA as in Dex-only treated cells (Fig. 8). A different pattern was noted with CBP. RA treatment resulted in more recruitment of CBP than did Dex treatment, and the Dex/RA level was equivalent to that of RA alone. The most interesting observation concerns the binding of p300 to the PEPCK gene promoter. RA and Dex each increase the binding of p300 by 2-fold; however, the combination results in about a 5-fold increase (Fig. 8 and Table I). A similar quantitative change occurs with the binding of pol II to the promoter (Table I). In concert with this observation, McGrane and co-workers (27) recently showed that pol II association with the PEPCK gene promoter is reduced in vitamin A-deficient mice.
A key role for p300 in the synergistic action of Dex/RA was established by selectively reducing the cellular levels of p300 and CBP by siRNA. Elimination of either had no effect on the RA response, whereas both reduced the Dex effect by about 50%. The absence of CBP had no effect on the synergistic effect of the Dex/RA combination, but removal of p300 abolished the response (Fig. 9). CBP and p300 are closely related proteins. Although encoded by different genes, they have several functional domains in common. The designation CBP/p300 implies a common overall function; however, recent reports (28) suggest each may govern unique cellular events. Mice with inactivation of a single allele of CBP develop a variety of hematological abnormalities that were not seen in mice that had a similar inactivating mutation in one of the p300 alleles. By contrast, the selective reduction of p300 makes F9 cells resistant to RA-induced differentiation, whereas a similar reduction of CBP has no effect (29).
The linear increase of the recruitment of p300 and pol II in conjunction with a nonlinear increase of the transcription response is not unexpected. Veitia (30) has explained this in the context of a series of cooperative interactions between promoter elements/enhancers and transcription factors with a succession of coregulator proteins and ultimately the basal transcription apparatus. The activation of the interferon- gene in response to viral infection is a case in point. The synergistic transcription response of this gene is thought to be the result of the formation of a unique activating surface composed of a domain in the p65 subunit of NFB and the activation domains of IRF1 and ATF-2/c-Jun with the architectural protein HMGI(Y). This enhanceosome recruits CBP/p300 to the basal transcription complex (31). The likely participation of other components unique to the complex assembled on the PEPCK gene promoter in response to Dex/RA awaits further investigation.
In addition to the PEPCK gene, a number of other genes that encode enzymes involved in metabolic processes have promoters that allow for a range of gene expression. Examples include the tyrosine aminotransferase, fatty-acid synthase, L-type pyruvate kinase, insulin-like growth factor-binding proteins, and the glucose 6-phosphate catalytic subunit genes (32 to 37). We have used the phrase "metabolic control domain" (MCD) to describe an array of DNA elements and associated transcription factors that provide an integrated response to a variety of signals (2, 15). As the PEPCK gene MCD is elucidated, the central importance of one element, gAF3, has become apparent. This DNA sequence (see Fig. 4) is involved as an accessory factor in the glucocorticoid response (8), as an important element in the retinoic acid response (7), the thyroid hormone response (5), as a component of the cyclic AMP response unit (15), in the amplifying effect of PGC-1 (38), and now in the synergistic effect of Dex/RA (Figs. 2, 4, and 5). The proteins known to bind to gAF3 include COUP-TF and RAR/RXR. It remains to be seen whether these proteins account for all of the roles played by this interesting element in the MCD.
Insulin and glucose, by inhibiting basal and hormone-induced transcription (3, 6, 25), set the lower end of expression of the PEPCK gene. The synergistic effect of Dex/RA sets the upper end and expands the repertoire of responses available from this MCD. In this regard, it is interesting that RA affords no additional response in the presence of a high affinity GR-binding element (cGRE, Fig. 6), which elicits an exaggerated response from this otherwise wild type promoter. When considered in the context of the MCD, the PEPCK gene promoter may have evolved to have a weak GRE (GR1) which, when combined with the variety of other elements and cognate transcription factors described above, allows for a graduated response between off and fully on and therefore a very flexible means of adjusting the rate of gluconeogenesis.
   FOOTNOTES   * This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants DK35107 and DK20593 from the Vanderbilt Diabetes Research and Training Center and by a Mentor-based fellowship award from the American Diabetes Association (to B. H.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-0615. Tel.: 615-322-7004; Fax: 615-322-7236.
1 The abbreviations used are: PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; RA, all-trans-retinoic acid; Dex, dexamethasone; GR, glucocorticoid receptor; CBP, CREB-binding protein; CREB, cAMP-response element-binding protein; ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays; RAR, retinoic acid receptors; RARE, retinoic acid-response element; RARU, retinoic acid-response unit; cRARE, consensus RARE; RXR, retinoid X receptor; siRNA, small interfering RNA; DMEM, Dul-becco's modified Eagle's medium; MCD, metabolic control domain; pol, polymerase.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   We thank Deborah Brown for help in preparation of the manuscript and Sam Wells of the Vanderbilt cell imaging core. We also thank Ronald M. Evans for providing the CMX-RAR/CMX-RXR plasmids and Richard O'Brien for providing the pSUPER plasmid.
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Levine, M., and Tjian, R. (2003) Nature 424, 147 to 151[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Lucas, P. C., and Granner, D. K. (1992) Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61, 1131 to 1173[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Sasaki, K., Cripe, T. P., Koch, S. R., Andreone, T. L., Petersen, D. D., Beale, E. G., and Granner, D. K. (1984) J. Biol. Chem. 259, 15242 to 15251[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lucas, P. C., O'Brien, R. M., Mitchell, J. A., Davis, C. M., Imai, E., Forman, B. M., Samuels, H. H., and Granner, D. K. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88, 2184 to 2188[Abstract] Park, E. A., Jerden, D. C., and Bahouth, S. W. (1995) Biochem. J. 309, 913 to 919[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Scott, D. K., O'Doherty, R. M., Stafford, J. M., Newgard, C. B., and Granner, D. K. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 24145 to 24151[Abstract/Free Full Text] Scott, D. K., Mitchell, J. A., and Granner, D. K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 6260 to 6264[Abstract/Free Full Text] Scott, D. K., Stromstedt, P. E., Wang, J. C., and Granner, D. K. (1998) Mol. Endocrinol. 12, 482 to 491[Abstract/Free Full Text] Hall, R. K., Sladek, F. M., and Granner, D. K. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92, 412 to 416[Abstract] Wang, J. C., Stromstedt, P. E., O'Brien, R. M., and Granner, D. K. (1996) Mol. Endocrinol. 10, 794 to 800[Abstract] Scott, D. K., Mitchell, J. A., and Granner, D. K. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 31909 to 31914[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yamada, K., Duong, D. T., Scott, D. K., Wang, J. C., and Granner, D. K. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 5880 to 5887[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sugiyama, T., Scott, D. K., Wang, J. C., and Granner, D. K. (1998) Mol. Endocrinol. 12, 1487 to 1498[Abstract/Free Full Text] Stafford, J. M., Waltner-Law, M., and Granner, D. K. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 3811 to 3819[Abstract/Free Full Text] Waltner-Law, M., Duong, D. T., Daniels, M. C., Herzog, B., Wang, X. L., Prasad, R., and Granner, D. K. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 10427 to 10435[Abstract/Free Full Text] Nakashatri, H., and Chambon, P. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 890 to 902[Abstract/Free Full Text] O'Brien, R. M., Noisin, E. L., Suwanichkul, A., Yamasaki, T., Lucas, P. C., Wang, J. C., Powell, D. R., and Granner, D. K. (1995) Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 1747 to 1758[Abstract] Duong, D. T., Waltner-Law, M. E., Sears, R., Sealy, L., and Granner, D. K. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 32234 to 32242[Abstract/Free Full Text] Brummelkamp, T. R., Bernards, R., and Agami, R. (2002) Science 296, 550 to 553[Abstract/Free Full Text] Pitot, H. C., Peraino, C., Morse, P. A., and Potter, V. R. (1964) Nat. Cancer Inst. Monogr. 13, 229 to 242 Stafford, J. M., Wilkinson, J. C., Beechem, J. M., and Granner, D. K. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 39885 to 39891[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chen, J. D., and Evans, R. M. (1995) Nature 377, 454 to 457[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Schulman, I. G., Juguilon, H., and Evans, R. M. (1996) Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 3807 to 3813[Abstract] Deleted in proof Granner, D., Andreone, T., Sasaki, K., and Beale, E. (1983) Nature 305, 545 to 549[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Blanco, J. C., Minucci, S., Lu, J., Yang, X. J., Walker, K. K., Chen, H., Evans, R. M., Nakatani, Y., and Ozato, K. (1998) Genes Dev. 12, 1638 to 1651[Abstract/Free Full Text] Scribner, K. B., and McGrane, M. M. (2003) J. Nutr. 133, 4112 to 4117[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kung, A. L., Rebel, V. I., Bronson, R. T., Ch'ng, L. E., Sieff, C. A., Livingston, D. M., and Yao, T. P. (2000) Genes Dev. 14, 272 to 277[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ugai, H., Uchida, K., Kawasaki, H., and Yokoyama, K. K. (1999) J. Mol. Med. 77, 481 to 494[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Veitia, R. A. (2003) Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 78, 149 to 170[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Yie, J., Merika, M., Munshi, N., Chen, G., and Thanos, D. (1999) EMBO J. 18, 3074 to 3089[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ganss, R., Weih, F., and Schutz, G. (1994) Mol. Endocrinol. 8, 895 to 903[Abstract] Schweizer, M., Roder, K., Zhang, L., and Wolf, S. S. (2002) Biochem. Soc. Trans. 30, 1070 to 1072[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Yamada, K., and Noguchi, T. (1999) Biochem. J. 337, 1 to 11[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Goswami, R., Lacson, R., Yang, E., Sam, R., and Unterman, T. (1994) Endocrinology 134, 736 to 743[Abstract] Suwanichkul, A., Allander, S. V., Morris, S. L., and Powell, D. R. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 30835 to 30841[Abstract/Free Full Text] Vander Kooi, B. T., Streeper, R. S., Svitek, C. A., Oeser, J. K., Powell, D. R., and O'Brien, R. M. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 11782 to 11793[Abstract/Free Full Text] Herzog, B., Hall, R. K., Wang, X., Waltner-Law, M., and Granner, D. K. (2004) Mol. Endocrinol. 18, 807 to 819[Abstract/Free Full Text]
