Identification of a Novel Sonic Hedgehog Response Element in the Chicken Ovalbumin Upstream Promoter-Transcription Factor II Promoter Venkatesh Krishnan, Gerard Elberg, Ming-Jer Tsai and Sophia Y. Tsai
Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted morphogen that regulates dorso-ventral patterning within the neural tube during embryonic development. It is well established that Shh can induce motor-neuron differentiation that coincides with the appearance of specific motor-neuron markers including chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II (COUP-TFII) and Isl1. However, the mechanism of Shh-induced signaling pathway in vertebrates is not clearly defined. In this report we have identified COUP-TFII as a target gene for Shh. In addition we have used a 1.6-kb region of the COUP-TFII promoter to identify a target element that mediates the Shh-induced activity. Extensive deletions introduced within this region have further enabled us to identify a novel sonic hedgehog response element (ShhRE) in the COUP-TFII promoter. Point mutations introduced within the ShhRE reveal some key nucleotides that are essential for protein(s)-binding activity. Finally, the ShhRE is capable of functioning as a true enhancer element and can mediate Shh-induced transactivation of reporter gene via a heterologous promoter.
   INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Sonic hedgehog Shh is a vertebrate member of the Drosophila segment polarity gene family and is a secreted morphogen that is responsible for providing the ventralizing signals within the neural tube (1, 2). The Drosophila homolog of Shh, called hedgehog (Hh), is expressed as a 471-amino acid polypeptide that is subsequently cleaved at amino acid 257 by a unique autoproteolytic mechanism (3). The C terminus of Hh harbors this proteolytic activity, and the N terminus, which includes the signal peptide sequence, is the secreted form of the protein. Several reports indicate that the N-terminal 20-kDa protein harbors the signaling activity of this morphogen (4, 5). Similar observations have been made for its murine homolog with respect to its N-terminal activity. Consistent with this observation is the high degree of homology (94 to 99%) at the N-terminal 180 amino acids between mouse, chicken, and zebra fish members of the hedgehog gene family (1).
It has been reported that increased Shh expression in the notochord results in the increased expression of HNF3ss in the floor plate and the subsequent appearance of other ventral markers in the neural tube (6). This results in the suppression of the dorsalizing signals, induced by BMP-2/4 originating from the neuroectoderm (7). The appearance of ventral markers within the neural tube establishes a dorso-ventral boundary, which is broadly described as dorso-ventral patterning. The induction of motor neuron markers within the ventro-lateral region is coincident with this Shh-mediated activity in the neural tube. Jessell and co-workers (8) have demonstrated that conditioned media from COS-1 cells that overexpress and secrete Shh can mediate motor neuron differentiation in naive neural plate explants.
Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factors (COUP-TFs) are members of the nuclear receptor superfamily and belong to the orphan receptor subclass (9, 10). Two genes called COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII have been identified in mammals. COUP-TFs are capable of dimerizing with the retinoid X receptor and are known to affect the regulation of retinoic acid receptor, retinoid X receptor, and vitamin D receptor responsive genes (9). COUP-TFs in general are expressed during embryonic development and are proposed to mediate essential mesenchymal-epithelial interactions that are crucial for proper organogenesis (10). To that effect, mRNA of COUP-TFII has been detected in the mesenchymal compartment of several developing organs such as the kidney, breast, and prostate (10).
COUP-TFs are expressed in the developing murine central and peripheral nervous systems. It is hypothesized that these two genes play a role in regulating the developmental fates of diencephalic neuromeres by altering the expression of some of the key factors involved in cell fate determination (11). Most importantly, COUP-TFII mRNA is highly expressed in differentiating motor neurons within the neural tube of a developing chick embryo. Notochord transplantation experiments suggest that this increase in COUP-TFII mRNA within the ventro-lateral region of the chick neural tube is mediated by signals derived from the notochord (12). Hence, we hypothesize that Shh, a secreted morphogen derived from the notochord, can elicit this increase in COUP-TFII expression in differentiating motor neurons.
For our studies we used the P19 mouse embryocarcinoma cells that were previously used to study the retinoid-mediated regulation of COUP-TFs (13, 14). Also, these cells exhibit some characteristics of neuronal cells when treated for extended periods with all-trans retinoic acid (15). For our initial experiments, conditioned medium derived from COS-1 cells transfected with a mouse Shh expression construct was applied to P19 cells. Later, an Escherichia coli-expressed N-terminal 20-kDa Shh protein fragment was used in our studies. In this report we provide evidence that Shh can induce COUP-TFII transcripts in P19 cells and evidence to implicate a novel target element on the COUP-TFII promoter that mediates this Shh-induced activity.
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Induction of COUP-TFII mRNA Expression by Conditioned Media Containing Shh To determine whether endogenous COUP-TFII mRNA is regulated by Shh in P19 cells, we overexpressed Shh in COS-1 cells. These cells have been shown to express, process, and secrete the N-terminal fragment of Shh in the medium (2). We transfected COS-1 cells with the pBKCMV-Shh plasmid. Conditioned medium was then concentrated to 1/20 of the volume and applied onto P19 cells. Control medium obtained from COS-1 cells transfected with pBKCMV (vector backbone without Shh) was used as control. RNA from these cells was used in a Northern blot assay. As shown in Fig. 1A, incubation of P19 cells with increasing amounts of conditioned media containing Shh N-terminal fragment results in a 5- to 7-fold increase in COUP-TFII mRNA (lanes 1, 2, and 3).
View larger version (20K):    Figure 1. Induction of COUP-TFII mRNA by Conditioned Media Containing Shh
A, P19 cells were treated with 200  microl (lane 2) and 400  microl (lane 3) of conditioned media containing Shh N-terminal fragment (pBKCMV-Shh). Lane 1 is the control lane, which was conditioned media from the vector-transfected COS-1 cells (pBKCMV). Densitometric analysis reveals a 3- to 5-fold increase in COUP-TFII mRNA levels after adjusting for the GAPDH internal control. B, COS-1 cells were transfected with pBKCMV alone (lane 1) or pBKCMV-Shh (lane 2 and 3). The medium was concentrated to 1/20 of the volume and separated on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was subsequently transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and subjected to a Western analysis as described in Materials and Methods. The 20-kDa band represents the secreted form of Shh N-terminal fragment. Lane 3 represents a membrane that contains the same media from lane 2 except that it was probed with a primary antibody that was preblocked with the specific antigen.
  To ascertain the presence of secreted Shh in the conditioned media, we performed a Western blot analysis using a polyclonal antibody that specifically recognizes the secreted N-terminal 20-kDa Shh protein fragment (Fig. 1B). Results from these experiments suggest that immunodetectable levels of the secreted 20 kDa N-terminal fragment of Shh are only present in COS-1 cell-conditioned media transfected with the pBKCMV-Shh plasmid (Fig. 1B; compare lanes 1 and 2). The N-terminal protein was used to block this antibody to corroborate its specificity (Fig. 1B; compare lanes 2 and 3). Since the signaling function of Shh is restricted to this N-terminal secreted fragment, we shall refer to this fragment as Shh for the remainder of this report.
Induction of COUP-TFII Promoter Activity by Conditioned Media Containing Shh To identify the mechanism of this Shh-mediated increase in COUP-TFII mRNA, we analyzed the effect of the Shh-containing conditioned media on the COUP-TFII promoter. A 1.6-kb promoter fragment that includes the transcription initiation site of COUP-TFII was cloned upstream of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene (p1.6CII-CAT) and transfected into P19 cells (13). As shown in Fig. 2 the conditioned media containing Shh (lanes 2 and 3) can increase COUP-TFII promoter activity. In a separate experiment we show that this increase can be elicited by adding 1 nM N-terminal 20-kDa Shh protein directly to COS-1 cells transfected with the p1.6CII-CAT plasmid (Fig. A; lanes 1 and 2). Hence, it can be inferred that P19 and COS-1 cells possess the necessary factors to transduce the Shh signal. These results indicate that the 1.6-kb fragment of the COUP-TFII promoter harbors the target element(s) that mediates Shh activation.
View larger version (46K):    Figure 2. Induction of COUP-TFII Promoter Activity by Conditioned Media Containing Shh
P19 cells were transfected with the p1.6CII-CAT plasmid. Increasing amounts of conditioned media from COS-1 cells containing Shh were added to P19 cells (lane 2; 200  microl, lane 3; 400  microl). Conditioned medium from COS-1 cells with no Shh was added separately to P19 cells (lane 1; 400  microl) transfected with the p1.6CII-CAT plasmid. A 10-fold increase was observed between lanes 1 and 3.
  Deletion Analysis of the COUP-TFII Promoter To further characterize the target element(s), deletion mutants of the COUP-TFII promoter with various end points were generated. COS-1 cells were transfected with this plasmid and treated with 1 nM Shh protein. As shown in Fig. 3A, the Shh-mediated increase in promoter activity was restricted to the 5' -1455 to -1212 nucleotide (nt) fragment (compare lanes 3 and 4 with the other lanes). In contrast, the p800CII-tkCAT (Fig. 3A, lanes 5 and 6), p900CII-tkCAT (Fig. 3A, lanes 7 and 8), or the tkCAT vector backbone (Fig. 3A, lanes 9 and 10) showed no increase in CAT activity in the presence of Shh.
View larger version (35K):    Figure 3. Identification of a ShhRE on the COUP-TFII Promoter
A, COS-1 cells were transfected with the following plasmids: p1.6CII-CAT, lanes 1 and 2; p240CII-tkCAT, lanes 3 and 4; p800CII-tkCAT, lanes 5 and 6; p925CII-tkCAT, lanes 7 and 8; and pBLCAT2, lanes 9 and 10. Cells were treated with 1 nM Shh for 36 h, and cell lysate was assayed for enzyme activity as described in Materials and Methods. A 4- to 6-fold increase in CAT activity was observed between lanes 1 and 3 and 2 and 4, respectively. B, COS-1 cells were transfected as described earlier with the plasmids as indicated by their starting nucleotide on the COUP-TFII promoter. A 4- to 6- fold increase in CAT activity was observed between lanes 1 and 3 and 2 and 4, respectively. C, COS-1 cells were transfected as described earlier with the plasmids as indicated by the region within the COUP-TFII promoter and described in Materials and Methods. A 3- to 4-fold increase was observed between lanes 1, 3, and 5 and 2, 4, and 6, respectively.
  To further define the Shh response element (ShhRE), we used nested primers to PCR amplify specific 5' deleted fragments of this -1455 to -1212 region of the COUP-TFII promoter. These deletion fragments were subsequently cloned upstream of a tkCAT reporter, transfected into COS-1 cells, and treated with or without 1 nM Shh protein. As shown in Fig. 3B, deletion of the first 112 nt (from -1455 to -1343) has no effect on the Shh inducibility (compare lanes 2 and 4). In contrast, deletion of the next 76 or 159 nt (from -1343 to -1267 or -1150) abolished Shh-dependent activation of the reporter gene (Fig. 3B; compare lanes 2, 6, and 8). Also, cells transfected with the tkCAT vector backbone showed no increase in CAT enzyme activity in the presence of 1 nM Shh (Fig. 3B, last two lanes). Results obtained from these studies suggest that the Shh-induced activity was mediated by a response element located between -1343 and -1267 of the COUP-TFII promoter.
Additional deletions were made within this region of the promoter to localize the target element that mediates Shh activation. These fragments were subsequently cloned upstream of a tkCAT reporter. COS-1 cells were transfected with these plasmids and treated with 1 nM Shh. As shown in Fig. 3C, deletion of 27 nt from -1343 does not affect Shh activation (compare lanes 4 and 6). However, additional removal of 18 nt (from -1316 to -1298) abolishes Shh activation (compare lanes 6 and 8). These results indicate that the 19-bp region between nucleotides -1316 and -1298 harbors most of this activity. Collectively, our results indicate that a region (-1316 to -1298) within the COUP-TFII promoter harbors a ShhRE that mediates the Shh-induced increase in COUP-TFII promoter activity that leads to increased steady-state levels of COUP-TFII mRNA.
Characterization of the ShhRE in P19 Cells To further confirm that the region between -1316 and -1298 is sufficient to confer the Shh response, we used this sequence in a heterologous promoter function assay. A 42-bp oligonucleotide (ShhRE) that includes this region and the flanking sequences was synthesized, and three copies of this oligo were placed upstream of a tkLUC reporter gene to determine whether this element confers Shh inducibility through a heterologous promoter. In addition, four specific mutations, M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5, were introduced along this element and three copies of each of these mutant oligos were cloned upstream of a tkLUC reporter (Fig. 4A). The resulting plasmids were then transfected into P19 cells, and reporter gene activity in response to 1 nM Shh was analyzed. As seen in Fig. 4B, three copies of ShhRE can provide a 5- to 7-fold increase in reporter gene activity in response to Shh (compare C and Shh). Also, as shown in Fig. 4B, the M2, M3, and M4 mutations abolish the Shh response (compare S and S M1, S M2, S M3). In contrast the M1 and M5 mutants were still capable of mediating this Shh-induced reporter gene activity (compare S, S M1, and S M5). These results indicate that the nucleotide sequences defined by the mutant oligos M2, M3, and M4 are important for mediating the Shh response. Hence, the point mutations introduced within the ShhRE that abolish transactivation must affect the binding of a putative transcription factor to this DNA element.
View larger version (27K):    Figure 4. Characterization of the ShhRE on a Heterologous Promoter
A, Sequence information on the wild type ShhRE and mutant oligonucleotides used in a transient transfection assay. B, P19 cells were transfected with 3XShhRE-tkCAT (lanes 1 and 2), 3XM1-tkCAT (lanes 3 and 4), 3XM2-tkCAT (lanes 5 and 6), 3XM3-tkCAT (lanes 7 and 8), and 3XM4-tkCAT (lanes 9 and 10). Cells were treated with (S) or without (C) 1 nM Shh for 24 h, and luciferase activity was measured as described in Materials and Methods. Results are expressed as mean  plus or minus  SD from three separate experiments.
  Electromobility Shift Assays (EMSAs) Using P19 Nuclear Extracts and Radiolabeled ShhRE To understand the nature of the protein-DNA interaction on this element, we performed EMSAs using radiolabeled ShhRE. The resulting autoradiograph indicates that there are two specific bands (see arrows), which are specifically enriched by Shh treatment (Fig. 4; compare lanes 1 and 2). Also, these bands are competed by the excess unlabeled ShhRE (Fig. 5; compare lanes 2 and 8). As expected, the mutant oligos M2, M3, and M4, which fail to exhibit enhancer-like activity, also fail to compete for these specific complexes when used as competitors (Fig. 5; compare lanes 4 through 6). Also, as expected, the oligo M1 and M5, which are functional ShhREs, could effectively compete for binding to these two specific complexes (Fig. 5; compare lanes 2, 3, and 7). These results suggest that any alterations in the TACATAATGCGCCG core (residues in bold) of this ShhRE results in decreased binding, which then leads to decreased enhancer activity in transient transfection assays.
View larger version (75K):    Figure 5. EMSA Using Radiolabeled ShhRE and Nuclear Extracts from P19 Cells
P19 cells were treated with (lanes 2 through 8) or without (lane 1) 1 nM Shh for 36 h. Later, cells were harvested and nuclear extract was obtained. Five micrograms of this extract were used in an EMSA using radiolabeled ShhRE, which was performed as described in Materials and Methods. Mutant competitor oligos at 100-fold molar excess were coincubated (lanes 3 through 8) with radiolabeled probe. The specific bands are indicated by the arrowheads.
     DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   The notochord transplantation assays on the chick neural tube provided us with the rationale to study the possible regulation of COUP-TFII mRNA by Shh. In this experiment we observe that a dorso-laterally placed ectopic notochord can induce motor neurons in an ectopic location within the ventral tube, and this coincides with the appearance of COUP-TFII transcripts (12). These results suggest that notochord-derived signals can induce COUP-TFII mRNA. In this report we provide evidence to clearly indicate that COUP-TFII mRNA is up-regulated by Shh. In addition, we have defined a novel target element within the COUP-TFII promoter that mediates most of this activity. Also, the low dose of Shh, namely 1 nM, which is capable of inducing this ShhRE-mediated activity, is in close agreement with this overall effect as observed by Jessell and co-workers (16) in neural explant assays.
The identification of this ShhRE provides us with a valuable tool to study the various signaling pathways that are induced by Shh. Previously, it was reported by Ingham and his colleagues (17) that a binding site for the Ci (cubidus interruptus) protein is a consensus HhRE (GACCACCCA), since it mediates the activation of the ptc (patched) promoter by Shh. Ptc is a downstream target gene of Hh and is part of the putative membrane-bound Shh receptor complex (18, 19, 20). However, the exact mechanism of ptc activation via this Ci element remains to be determined. Interestingly, the ShhRE found on the COUP-TFII promoter bears very little similarity to that of the Drosophila Ci binding site. In our oligo competition experiments, we demonstrate that any changes in the core sequence (TACATAATGCGCCG) are deleterious to Shh-induced binding. Also, a transcription factor data bank analysis revealed very little information as to the exact identity of the factor(s) that may bind this element. The identification of this novel response element suggests that in higher vertebrates the pleiotropic effects of Shh can be mediated by multiple pathways, some of which may target the Gli (mammalian homolog of Ci) binding site and others may target novel elements such as the one in the COUP-TFII promoter.
As shown in Fig. 5, the DNA-binding complexes in P19 nuclear extracts are induced by Shh. The precise mechanism for this increase in binding is not known. It is possible that Shh may simply modulate the activity of this factor(s) that binds to the ShhRE. In agreement with this possible modulatory role for Shh, the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKA) has been implicated in the Hh-signaling pathway. In Drosophila, it is believed that PKA agonists can suppress signaling mediated by Hh. Also, localized loss of PKA -/- activity in a Drosophila imaginal disc can mimic Hh activity even in the absence of Hh (21, 22). Similar results have been obtained using a dominant negative form of PKA in the mouse dorsal central nervous system (23, 24). These observations have led to the popular belief that reversal of a PKA-repressed pathway is one of the major mechanisms of Hh activity in Drosophila and in mammals. However, we do not observe a significant decrease in our transient transfection assays when COS-1 cells are treated with both Shh and forskolin (90  microM) using the 3X ShhRE-tkCAT. Also, forskolin fails to decrease Shh-induced binding in an EMSA using radiolabeled ShhRE (data not shown). These results suggest that in higher vertebrates additional pathways that are independent of PKA may also be induced by Shh. The identification of COUP-TFII as a novel target gene and the characterization of a ShhRE within its promoter may allow for the unraveling of this complex pathway.
Our results provide a novel target gene for Shh, namely COUP-TFII, which can be exploited to study some of the intermediate steps in the Shh-signaling pathway. In particular, COUP-TFII is a very well characterized transcription factor whose ability to affect the function of several other nuclear receptors provides an attractive target for the pleiotropic effects of Shh signaling. However, the expression of COUP-TFII transcripts and areas in which Shh exerts its signaling activity may be limited to a few regions within the developing embryo (1, 10).
The Shh homozygous null mice display the predicted phenotype based on the expression profile of this protein. The Shh null mice display a cyclopia phenotype along with a loss of maintenance and organization along the axial midline structures of the developing embryo (25). However, in the Shh null mice we can detect some COUP-TFII transcripts (F. Pereira, and M-J. Tsai, personal communication). This observation suggests that COUP-TFII is not exclusively regulated by Shh. These results are not surprising since COUP-TFII is expressed throughout mouse embryonic development in a wide variety of tissues (10, 11). Also, we and others have shown that COUP-TFs are downstream target genes of retinoic acid and that their expression is increased by treatment with both 9-cis and all-trans retinoic acid (13, 14).
We have generated COUP-TFII homozygous null mice to study the possible involvement of COUP-TFII in motor-neuron differentiation. However, the COUP-TFII null mice die before 10.0 days postcoitum (dpc). Interestingly, no obvious change in the overall morphology within the ventro-lateral region of the neural tube is observed (F. Pereira and M-J. Tsai, personal communication). We believe that the presence of COUP-TFI transcripts in the neural tube may allow for some functional compensation of COUP-TFII, which may obscure any obvious defects in motor neuron differentiation. We are currently attempting a localized knock out of both COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII in the ventro-lateral region of the neural tube to study the possible involvement of these genes in motor neuron differentiation.
Our results have provided a novel target gene for Shh signaling in P19 mouse embryocarcinoma cells. Activation of COUP-TFII, which is known to harbor a trans-repressor domain in its C-terminal 15 amino acids, may have important implications in neural tube patterning (26). Shh has been implicated in enabling the notochord-derived signals to repress the dorsalizing signals induced by BMP-2/4 from the roof plate and or the neural epithelium of the neural tube (7, 27). It has been reported that COUP-TFI can inhibit the BMP-4 promoter in fetal rat calvarial osteoblasts (28). It is possible that temporal induction of COUP-TFII expression by Shh may serve to mediate this very repression in specific regions that are fated to become motor neurons in the ventro-lateral region of the neural tube. In conclusion, our results provide a novel target gene (COUP-TFII) and a novel target element (ShhRE) that seem to mediate Shh-induced COUP-TFII expression in P19 mouse embryocarcinoma cells. This finding will allow for the elucidation of the numerous signaling pathways induced by Shh.
   MATERIALS AND METHODS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Plasmid Constructs The mouse Shh cDNA plasmid was kindly provided by Dr. Andrew P. McMahon. The XhoI/EcoRI 2.6-kb fragment of the mouse Shh plasmid was subcloned into a XhoI/EcoRI site in the pBKCMV (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) vector to generate the pBKCMV-Shh plasmid. The p1.6CII-CAT plasmid was generated as described earlier (13). The 1.6-kb promoter of COUP-TFII was cut with ApaI to generate 800-bp, 450-bp, and 240-bp fragments. These were subcloned into a pBluescript-KS plasmid. The 800-bp (-1212 to -412) and 240-bp (-1455 to -1212) fragments were subsequently cloned into the pBLCAT2 plasmid at the HindIII/BamHI and HindII/XbaI sites, respectively, to generate the p800CII-tkCAT and the p240CII-tkCAT plasmids.
Oligonucleotide Sequences ShhRE: CGGGATCC AGT GGG TTC TAC ATA ATG CGC CCG GGA AGATCTTCC
M1: CGGGATCC AGT GAA TTC TAC ATA ATG CGC CCG GGA AGATCTTCC
M2: CGGGATCC AGT GGG TTC CGC ATA ATG CGC CCG GGA AGATCTTCC
M3: CGGGATCC AGT GGG TTC TAC GTG ATG CGC CCG GGA AGATCTTCC
M4: CGGGATCC AGT GGG TTC TAC ATA ATG CGC ATT GGA AGATCTTCC
M5: CGGGATCC AGT GGG TTC TAC ATA ATG CGC CCG GAG AGATCTTCC
The ShhRE, M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5 oligos were cut with BamHI and BglII and ligated to generate a 3-copy insert. Later this multimer was excised from a gel and subcloned into the BamHI site of the ptk109 plasmid, which contains a luciferase reporter gene driven by a minimal tk promoter.
PCR Primers -808 forward primer: GCT CTA GAG CAG AGA GCT CAG TGA GCT
+117 reverse primer: TGA AGA TCT GAG TGT GCA GC
-1343 forward primer: GCT CTA GAG CGG AGA GCA TTA TTC AGT
-1267 forward primer: GCT CTA GAG CAA ACC ACT GTG CCC GAT
-1150 forward primer: GCT CTA GAG CAT TTA GAG GCA TCG CCA
-1316 forward primer: GCT CTA GAG CGT TCT ACA TAA TGC GCC
-1298 forward primer: GCT CTA GAG CAT GCG CCG GGA GTC CCG GGT GGA C
-1070 reverse primer: GAA GAT CTT CCT GGC CAC AGA GAG G
The above mentioned primers were used to PCR amplify specific regions within the COUP-TFII promoter. One microgram of the 1.6-kb region was used as template, and 100 ng/ml of each of the forward and reverse primers were used in a 50- microl reaction along with 0.5 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphates (final concentration) and 1  microl of Taq polymerase. Ten percent dimethylsulfoxide was included in some reactions when the regions to be amplified had a GC content that was greater than 50%. The amplified DNA fragments were phenol- and chloroform-purified followed by an overnight restriction enzyme digest with the appropriate enzymes. All forward primers were digested with XbaI, and all reverse primers were digested with BglII. Later these fragments were subcloned into a pBluescript II KS plasmid vector at the XbaI and BglII sites. T7 and T3 primers were used to sequence these PCR-amplified fragments and after verification, these fragments were subcloned into the pBLCAT2 (tkCAT) or pBLCAT3 (CAT alone) plasmid at the XbaI/BamHI site. The resultant plasmids were sequenced using the PCR primers and were subsequently used in transient transfection assays.
COS-1 Conditioned Media COS-1 cells were plated at a density of 2 x 106 cells per 10-cm plate. Cells were transiently transfected using the diethylaminoethyl-Dextran method as described previously (29). Briefly, 1  microg of pBKCMV-Shh or pBKCMV plasmid was dissolved in 60  microl Tris-borate-NaCl (TBS) buffer and was incubated along with 120  microl diethylaminoethyl-Dextran (Sigma, St. Louis, MO; 5 mg/ml in TBS) for 30 min at room temperature. Later, this DNA solution was mixed with 4 ml TBS buffer containing 10% NuSerum (Collaborative Biomedical Products, Bedford, MA). This mixture was then applied to the 10-cm plate, and the cells were incubated in this mixture for 6 h. Cells were shocked with 10% dimethylsulfoxide for 2 min followed by a 4-h incubation with DMEM (no serum) containing 100  microM Chloroquine (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Cells were washed and fresh medium was added containing 5% FBS. Conditioned medium was obtained after 24, 36, and 48 h and assayed by Western blot after the medium had been concentrated to 1/20 of the volume in an Amicon (Beverly, MA) concentrator. The 48-h time point was found to be optimal for use in other assays.
Northern Blot Analysis P19 cells were grown to a density of 5 x 105 cells per 10-cm plate. Cells were used between passage numbers 5 and 20. Late passage cells displayed significant variations in our experiments and hence were not used in these reported studies. Conditioned media obtained from the appropriately transfected COS-1 cells were applied at a specific time point, and 40 h later total RNA was obtained using the Trizol (Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD) reagent. This method is a modification of the guanidinium-HCl method of RNA isolation (30). RNA was dissolved in 100% deionized formamide and used within a short period or stored in 70% ethanol for extended periods at -70 C. Ten micrograms of total RNA were reprecipitated and washed with 70% ethanol and redissolved in diethyl pyrocarbonate-treated water. This RNA was heated at 55 C for 15 min in loading buffer (35% formamide, 10% formaldehyde, 20 mM Na2HPO4, pH 6.8, and loading dye containing 0.25% xylene cyanol and 0.25% bromophenol blue). RNA was quick cooled on ice and loaded onto a 1% agarose gel containing 1 M formaldehyde in an SPC buffer (20 mM Na2HPO4, pH 6.8, and 2 mM EDTA). The gel was run in 1x SPC buffer and stained with ethidium bromide (0.01% solution in 1x SPC) for 20 min followed by destaining for 1 h. The separated RNA was blotted onto a Hybond N nylon membrane (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL). A RNA ladder (6  microg) was run along with each gel and was used to estimate the size of the transcript. The membrane was UV-cross-linked (Stratalinker, Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) for 2 min and was dried in a gel dryer at 80 C. The membrane was prehybridized using the QuikHyb solution from Stratagene for 1 h and was hybridized with a radiolabeled 500-bp 5'-untranslated region fragment (31) of COUP-TFII for 2 h. Later, the membrane was washed twice with 2x saline sodium citrate (SSC) buffer and 0.1% (wt/vol) SDS. This was followed by two high-stringency washes using 0.1 x SSC and 0.1% SDS at 65 C. The residual SDS was removed using a quick 2x SSC wash, and the membrane was exposed to a XOMAT-AR film (Eastman Kodak, Rochester, NY) for 6 to 12 h. The membrane was then stripped using 0.1x SSPE (sodium phosphate-EDTA), 1% SDS solution at 85 C for 15 min. It was then rehybridized with a specific 5' 1.2-kb GAPDH probe (32).
Transient Transfection Assays COS-1 cells were transiently transfected as described earlier, using 1  microg reporter plasmid. P19 cells were transfected using a replication-deficient adenovirus as described earlier (33). Briefly, adenovirus (2 x 108 particles) and 100 ng reporter plasmid were incubated at room temperature for 30 min in a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.3, and 150 mM NaCl. This was followed by infection of P19 cells (400,000 cells per well) with this viral-DNA mixture for 2 h in a 37 C incubator in DMEM containing 5% FBS. E. coli-expressed Shh (1 nM) was added along with the fresh media supplemented with 10% FBS after transfection and incubated for 24 h, before the cells were harvested for reporter gene activity. A Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA) protein assay reagent was used to quantitate the amount of protein. Five micrograms of cell lysate were used in a CAT assay, which was performed as described previously (34). For the luciferase reporter gene assays, 10  microg cell lysate were incubated with the enzyme substrate in a 60- microl reaction mix according to the instructions provided in the Promega luciferase assay system kit (Promega, Madison, WI). Enzyme activity was measured in a Monolight analytical luminometer (Analytical/Luminescence Laboratory, Ann Arbor, MI) for 5 sec and was plotted as relative luciferase units per 20  microg lysate.
Alternately in Fig. 2, P19 cells were transfected using 1  microg p1.6CII-CAT plasmid along with 6  microg Lipofectamine (Life Technologies) reagent in 4 ml DMEM without serum for 10 h. Later cells were washed and 12 ml fresh DMEM containing 10% FBS were added along with 200  microl or 400  microl concentrated COS-1-conditioned media containing Shh. In parallel, 400  microl concentrated COS-1-conditioned media without Shh, along with 12 ml DMEM, were also added to P19 cells. After 36 h cells were harvested and cell lysate was obtained. Protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad protein assay reagent. Twenty micrograms of cell lysate were used to analyze CAT activity as described earlier.
EMSAs P19 cells were seeded at 5 x 105 cells per 10-cm plate in DME-F12 media with or without 1 nM Shh. After 36 h cells were harvested and washed in PBS. Cells were incubated in 200  microl hypotonic buffer containing 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, and 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, for 15 min at 4 C. Twenty-five microliters of 10% NP-40 were added, and the cells were vortexed for 30 sec. Later these cells were centrifuged at 5000 rpm at 4 C to spin down the nuclei. Nuclei were then incubated in 30  microl hypertonic buffer containing 0.4 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, 10% glycerol, and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, for 30 min in a gentle shaker at 4 C. This mixture was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4 C for 10 min, and the supernatant was immediately dialyzed for 4 h in 500 ml buffer containing 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 5% glycerol at 4 C. A 10 kDa molecular mass cut-off membrane was used for this dialysis. A Bio-Rad protein assay reagent was used to quantitate the amount of protein. Five micrograms of nuclear extract were incubated along with 50,000 cpm of radiolabeled ShhRE for 15 min, in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 80 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mg/ml BSA, 200 ng salmon sperm DNA, 3  microg poly dG-dC, 1  microg poly dI-dC, and 5% glycerol. One hundred molar excess of competitor oligos were incubated in the appropriate reaction mix along with the nuclear extract. The samples were then loaded onto a 5% native polyacrylamide gel, and the protein-DNA complexes formed were separated and analyzed by autoradiography.
Western Blot Analysis Conditioned media from the appropriately transfected COS-1 cells were concentrated to 1/20 the volume using an Amicon concentrator and applied onto a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel. The separating gel was immediately transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris, 380 mM glycine, 0.1% (wt/vol) SDS, and 20% methanol. The transfer was performed at 65 V for 16 h in a cold room. To confirm complete transfer, the gel was stained with a Coomassie stain for 20 min followed by destaining in a 40% methanol-10% glacial acetic acid solution for 1 to 2 h. The resultant membrane was subjected to the standard enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) Western blotting kit protocol (Amersham, Life Science). A rabbit polyclonal antibody that specifically recognized the N-terminal 20 kDa Shh protein (3) was used to detect the levels of N-terminal 20-kDa protein in the conditioned media. The primary antibody was divided into two groups and was blocked with BSA or 4  microg/ml N-terminal Shh protein fragment for 2 h at 4 C with gentle shaking. The membrane divided into two halves and was incubated with the primary antibody or the preblocked antibody at a 1:3000 dilution in 20 mM Tris, 137 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, pH 7.6 (TBS-T) for 1 h. The membrane was washed and then incubated with a horseradish peroxidase-labeled anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:1000 dilution) for 1 h. This was followed by another wash and incubation with the detection mix provided in the ECL kit, for 1 min. The membrane was immediately drained and exposed to film for 30 sec. A prestained marker (Bio-Rad) was used to estimate the apparent molecular masses of the resultant bands.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   We are grateful to Dr. Andrew P. McMahon (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA) for the mouse Shh cDNA plasmid. We are grateful to Dr. Philip A. Beachy (Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD) for the N-terminal 20-kDa protein fragment and for the rabbit polyclonal antibody that recognizes this fragment. We would like to thank Dr. Carolyn Smith and Cheryl Parker for help with the preparation of the adenovirus; Patrick Samora for his technical assistance; and Drs. Fred A. Pereira and Debra E. Bramblett for their critical review of this manuscript.
   FOOTNOTES   Address requests for reprints to: Sophia Y. Tsai, Ph.D., Professor, Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030.
This work was supported by NIH Grant DK-44988 (to S.Y.T.) and NIH Grant DK- 45641 (to M.J.T.).
Received for publication February 20, 1997. Revision received June 3, 1997. Accepted for publication June 9, 1997.
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Echelard Y, Epstein DJ, St-Jacques B, Shen L, Mohler J, McMahon JA, Mc Mahon AP 1993 Sonic hedgehog, a member of a family of putative signaling molecules, is implicated in the regulation of CNA polarity. Cell 75:1417 to 1430[Medline] Tanabe Y, Roelink H, Jessell TM 1995 Induction of motor neurons by sonic hedgehog is independent of floor plate differentiation. Curr Biol 5:651 to 658[Medline] Porter JA, von Kessler DP, Ekker SC, Young KE, Lee JJ, Moses K, Beachy PA 1995 The product of hedgehog autoproteolytic cleavage active in local and long-range signalling. Nature 374:363 to 366[CrossRef][Medline] Lai CJ, Ekker SC, Beachy PA, Moon RT 1995 Patterning of the nerural ectoderm of Xenopus laevis by the amino terminal product of hedgehog autoproteolytic cleavage. Development 121:2349 to 2360[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lopez-Martinez A, Chang DT, Chiang C, Porter JA, Ros MA, Simandl BK, Beachy PA, Fallon JF 1995 Limb-patterning activity and restricted posterior localization of the amino terminal product of sonic hedgehog cleavage. Curr Biol 5:791 to 796[Medline] Altaba RA, Placzek M, Baldassare M, Dodd J, Jessell TM 1995 Early stages of notochord and floor plate development in the chick embryo defined by normal and induced expression of HNF-3 beta. Dev Biol 170:299 to 313[CrossRef][Medline] Liem Jr KF, G Tremml G, Roelink H, TM Jessell TM 1995 Dorsal differentiation of neural plate cells induced by BMP-mediated signals from epidermal ectoderm. Cell 82:969 to 979[Medline] Roelink H, Augsburger A, Heemskerk J, Altaba AR, Tanabe Y, Placzek M, Edlund T, Jessell TM, Dodd J 1994 Floor plate and motor neuron induction by vhh-1 vertebrate homolog of hedgehog expressed by the notochord. Cell 76:761 to 775[Medline] Cooney A, Leng X, Tsai S, O Malley BW, Tsai M-J 1993 Multiple mechanisms of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor-dependent repression of transactivation by the vitamin D, thryroid hormone, and retinoic acid receptors. J Biol Chem 268:4152 to 4160[Abstract/Free Full Text] Pereira FA, Qiu Y, Tsai M-J, Tsai SY 1994 Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF): expression during mouse embryogenesis. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 53:503 to 508[CrossRef] Qiu Y, Cooney A, Kuratani S, DeMayo FJ, Tsai SY, Tsai M-J 1994 Spatiotemporal expression patterns of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factors in the developing central nervous system: evidence for a role in segmental patterning of the diencephalon. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:4451 to 4455[Abstract] Lutz B, Kuratani S, Cooney A, Wawersik S, Tsai SY, Eichele G, Tsai M-J 1994 Motor neuron-specific expression of the orphan receptor COUP-TF during early spinal cord development. Development 120:25 to 36[Abstract/Free Full Text] Qiu Y, Krishnan V, Pereira F, Tsai SY, Tsai M-J 1995 Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factors and their regulation. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 56:81 to 86 Jonk LJC, de Jonge MEJ, Pals CEGM, Wissink S, Vervaart JMA, Schoorlemmer J, Kruijer W 1994 Cloning and expression during development of three murine members of the COUP family of nuclear orphan receptors. Mechan Dev 47:81 to 97[CrossRef][Medline] Rudnicki MA, McBurney MW 1987 Cell Culture methods and induction of differentiation of embryonal carcinoma cell lines. In: Rickwood D, Hames BD (eds) Practical Approach Series. IRL Press, Washington DC, pp 32 to 36 Roelink H, Porter JA, Chiang C, Tanabe Y, Chang DT, Beachy PA, Jessell TM 1995 Floor plate and motor neuron induction by different concentrations of the amino-terminal cleavage product of sonic hedgehog autoproteolysis. Cell 81:445 to 455[Medline] Alexandre C, Jacinto A, Ingham PW 1996 Transcriptional activation of hedgehog target genes in Drosophila is mediated directly by the Cubitus interruptus protein, a member of the GLI family of zinc finger DNA-binding proteins. Genes Dev 10:2003 to 2013[Abstract] Stone DM, Hynes M, Armanini M, Swanson TA, Gu Q, Johnson Rl, Scott MP, Pennica D, Goddard A, Phillips H, Noll M, Hooper JE, Sauvage F, Rosenthal A 1996 The tumor-suppressor gene patched encodes a candidate receptor for sonic hedgehog. Nature 384:129 to 134[CrossRef][Medline] Marigo V, Tabin CJ 1996 Regulation of patched by Shh in the developing nerual tube. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:9346 to 9351[Abstract/Free Full Text] Marigo V, Davey RA, Zuo Y, Cunningham JM, Tabin CJ 1996 Biochemical evidence that patched is the hedgehog receptor. Nature 384:176 to 179[CrossRef][Medline] Pan D, Rubin GM 1995 cAMP-dependent protein kinase and hedgehog act antagonistically in regulating decapentaplegic transcription in Drosophila imaginal discs. Cell 80:543 to 552[Medline] Li W, Ohlmeyer JT, Lane ME, Kalderon D 1995 Function of PKA in hedgehog signal transduction and Drosophila imaginal disc development. Cell 80:553 to 562[Medline] Hammerschmidt M, Bitgood MJ, McMahon AP 1996 Protein kinase A is a common negative regulator of hedgehog signaling in the vertebrate embryo. Genes Dev 10:647 to 658[Abstract] Epstein DJ, Marti E, Scott MP, McMahon AP 1996 Antagonizing cAMP-dependent protein kinase A in the dorsal CNS activates a conserved sonic hedgehog signaling pathway. Development 122:2885 to 2894[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chiang C, Litingtung Y, Lee E, Young KE, Cordern JL, Westphal H, Beachy PA 1996 cAMP-dependent protein kinase and hedgehog act antagonistically in regulating decapentaplegic transcription in Drosophila imaginal discs. Nature 383:407 to 413[CrossRef][Medline] Leng X, Cooney AJ, Tsai SY, Tsai M-J 1996 Molecular mechanisms of COUP-TF-mediated transcriptional repression: evidence for transrepression and active repression. Mol Cell Biol 16:2332 to 2340[Abstract] Bitgood MJ, McMahon AP 1995 Hedgehog and Bmp genes are coexpressed at many diverse sites of cell-cell interaction in the mouse embryo. Dev Biol 172:126 to 138[CrossRef][Medline] Feng JQ, Harris MA, Cooney A, Tsai M-J, Christy B, Chen D, Mundy GR, Harris SE 1995 The mouse bone morphogenetic protein-4 (BMP-4) gene: promoter analysis in fetal rat calvarial osteoblasts. J Biol Chem 270:28364 to 28373[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lopata MA, Cleveland DW, Sollner-Webb B 1984 High level transient expresison of a chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene by DEAE-dextran-mediated DNA transfection coupled with a dimethyl sulfoxide of glycerol shock treatment. Nucleic Acids Res 12:5707 to 5717[Abstract] Chomczynski P, Sacchi N 1987 Single step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal Biochem 162:156 to 159[CrossRef][Medline] Qiu Y, Krishnan V, Zeng Z, Gilbert DJ, Copeland NG, Gibson L, Yang-Feng T, Jenkins NA, Tsai M-J, Tsai SY 1995 Isolation, characterization, and chromosomal localization of mouse and human COUP-TfI and II genes. Genomics 29:240 to 246[CrossRef][Medline] Ward T, Clemens MJ, Taylor KW 1990 Effects of a diabetogenic strain of encephalomyocarditis (EMC) virus on protein synthesis in mouse islets of Langerhans. Biochem J 270:777 to 781[Medline] Allgood VE, Zhang Y, O Malley BW, Weigel NL 1997 Analysis of chicken progesterone receptor function and phosphorylation using and adenovirus-mediated procedure for high-efficiency DNA transfer. Biochemistry 36:224 to 232[CrossRef][Medline] Gorman CM, Moffat LF, Howard BH 1982 Recombinant genomes which express chloramphenicol acetyltransferase in mammalian cells. Mol Cell Biol 2:1044 to 1051[Medline]
