Stat 5b and the Orphan Nuclear Receptors Regulate Expression of the 2-Macroglobulin (2M) Gene in Rat Ovarian Granulosa Cells Maya Dajee, Georg H. Fey and JoAnne S. Richards
Department of Cell Biology (M.D., J.S.R.) Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Texas 77030 Department of Genetics (G.H.F.) Institute for Microbiology, Biochemistry and Genetics Friedrich-Alexander University D91058 Erlanger-Nurenberg, Germany
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   2-Macroglobulin (2M) is a serine protease inhibitor and cytokine inactivator associated with inflammation and tissue remodeling. The gene encoding this protein is selectively induced in the rat corpus luteum by the luteotropic hormone and cytokine, PRL. The promoter of the 2M gene contains two regulatory regions that bind a diverse set of transcription factors and confer functional activity in ovarian granulosa-luteal cells. The PRL response element (PRLRE) binds PRL-activated (tyrosine-phosphorylated) signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat 5b and Stat 5a). 5'-Deletion of the Stat-binding sites or mutation of either one or both of these sites within the context of the intact promoter abolished PRL inducibility of 2M promoter-reporter constructs in granulosa-luteal cells. Cotransfection with a vector expressing a dominant negative, truncated form of Stat 5b abolished PRL-induced activation of 2M transgenes. 5'-Deletion of the Stat-binding sites abolished all promoter-reporter activity in response to PRL. Internal deletion of a second functional domain 3' of the PRLRE also abolished PRL inducibility and markedly reduced basal activity, indicating that functional interactions between these two regions might occur. The 3'-region was shown to bind orphan members of the nuclear receptor superfamily, steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) and chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF) and has been called the orphan receptor response element (ORRE). When site-specific mutations were made in either the SF-1-binding site or the two COUP-TF direct repeat (DR1 and DR2) binding sites in the context of the intact promoter, specific changes in the functional activity of this novel region of the 2M promoter were observed. Mutation of the SF-1 site drastically reduced basal activity of the 2M promoter. Mutation of the COUP-TF sites caused the basal activity of the 2M promoter to increase markedly. Neither mutation altered the PRL inducibility of these constructs. Lastly, differentiation of cultured granulosa cells was required for functional activity of both the PRLRE and the ORRE. Collectively, these results document for the first time that Stat 5b, SF-1, and COUP-TF each exert specific effects on the function of the 2M promoter: basal activity is controlled by the balance of SF-1 (positive) and COUP-TF (negative) activities and PRL inducibility is mediated by activation of Stat 5b. These results add 2M to the list of nonsteroidal genes regulated by SF-1 in the gonads and provide the first evidence that COUP-TF has a specific role in regulating ovarian gene activity. In addition, the ORRE and PRLRE act independently of, rather than synergistically with, each other to regulate basal and PRL-induced expression of 2M in ovarian luteal cells.
   INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Tissue-specific expression of genes is dependent on the cellular set of transcription factors as well as the selective activation of these factors by hormones, growth factors, and cytokines. One transcription factor that dictates ovarian (gonadal) development is steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1), an orphan member of the nuclear receptor superfamily (1). SF-1 binds as a monomer to (CA)AGGTCA-like motifs and interacts with other factors to regulate the expression of most steroid hydroxylase genes (2, 3, 4, 5). During the development of preovulatory follicles and in granulosa cells in culture, FSH induces expression of two steroid hydroxylase genes encoding aromatase (CYP19; Ref. 6) and P450scc (CYP11A; Ref. 7). SF-1 also regulates the expression of genes encoding peptides, including Mullerian Inhibiting Substance (8) and oxytocin (9). Thus, SF-1 appears to play a critical role in regulating genes expressed in differentiated granulosa cells in response to FSH (6).
When granulosa cells luteinize, they respond to a different set of extracellular signals, one of which is the cytokine PRL. In the ovary (10, 11, 12), as in other target tissues (13, 14, 15), PRL activates the JAK (Janus kinase)/STAT (signal transducers and activators of transcription) pathway. One gene that is selectively regulated by PRL in luteal cells encodes 2-macroglobulin (2M), a large tetrameric protein that traps and inactivates proteases and cytokines. The inducibility of this gene by interleukin-6 (IL-6) in rat liver (16) and by PRL in rat luteal cells (11) has provided a unique opportunity to delineate the cellular signaling mechanisms used by each cytokine to control the tissue-specific expression of this gene. In previous analyses, we have shown that Stat 5 is activated by PRL and binds to specific -activating sequences (GAS) sites present in the promoter of the 2M gene and originally referred to as the IL-6 response element (IL6-RE) based on the activation of this gene by IL-6 in rat liver (16). Because a luciferase reporter construct containing 1.2 kb of the 2M promoter showed high basal activity when transfected into differentiated granulosa cells in the absence of PRL, we sought to identify additional factors involved in regulating the promoter of this gene and the extent to which the high basal as well as PRL inducibility were dependent on hormone-induced differentiation of granulosa cells in culture (10).
As a result of additional analyses of the 2M promoter, we observed that when a 109-bp region directly 3' of the Stat 5-binding sites was deleted, the 2M promoter-reporter construct lost both its high basal activity and PRL-regulated induction. When the sequence of this region was examined, we noted that it contained putative binding sites for SF-1 and chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF). Like SF-1, COUP-TF is a member of the orphan nuclear receptor superfamily (17, 18). However, unlike SF-1, it is presumed to be expressed ubiquitously and has been shown to exhibit complex interactions by binding, as a heterodimer, other members of the nuclear receptor superfamily (19). COUP-TF homodimers bind to a wide spectrum of response elements containing, as a core half-site, the A/GGGTCA motif, the spacing and orientation of which determine the relative binding affinity of COUP-TF (19). Recent evidence indicates that Stat proteins may interact functionally with other transcription factors and coregulatory molecules, including members of the nuclear receptor superfamily (20, 21, 22, 23, 24). Based on the close juxtaposition and functional activities of the PRL response element (PRLRE) and the putative orphan receptor-binding sites, it seemed reasonable to predict that factors binding to these regions might interact to control maximal expression of the 2M gene in granulosa-luteal cells.
Based on these considerations and the tissue- specific expression of this gene in the rat ovary, the following studies were undertaken to determine which Stat 5 proteins were present and functional in differentiated granulosa cells, if either SF-1 or COUP-TF bound to the intact 2M promoter, and if either SF-1 or COUP-TF interacted functionally with Stat 5 proteins to confer maximal expression of this gene in response to PRL. The functional activities of the Stat-binding sites and the orphan receptor-binding sites were analyzed by generating site-specific mutations in the context of the intact promoter and transfecting differentiated granulosa cells with specific intact and mutant promoter-luciferase reporter constructs. Activities were related to the binding of specific nuclear factors and the stage of differentiation of the granulosa cells.
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Two Regions in the Proximal Promoter of the 2M Gene Are Required for Functional Activity in Granulosa Cells To identify and characterize the functional regions in the 2M promoter conferring both PRL and high basal activity in granulosa cells, specific deletion constructs were generated to remove sequences either 5' (-371 bp and -209 bp) or 3' (-209) of the Stat-binding sites or which deleted the PRLRE (-159 bp) (Fig. 1). The 1.2-kb 2M-luciferase construct, as well as the deletion constructs, were transiently transfected into differentiated granulosa cells that had been cultured with FSH and testosterone for 48 h. After 4 h, granulosa cells were treated with or without PRL for 6 h. Luciferase activity was measured, normalized to the amount of protein present in the sample, and then expressed as activity/ microg protein. Constructs with 5'-deletions to -371 and -209 bp retained both PRL inducibility and high basal activity (Fig. 1). Deletion of the Stat-binding sites reduced basal activity and abolished PRL- inducible activity (Fig. 1). Deletion of a 109-bp region 3' of the PRLRE (-209) reduced basal activity to that seen with the minimal -48-bp 2M promoter and abolished PRL inducibility. These results indicated that the PRLRE as well as the 109-bp region immediately downstream of the PRLRE might interact functionally to confer maximal promoter activity in granulosa cells.
View larger version (20K):    Figure 1. Two Regions of the 2M Promoter Are Required for Functional Activity
Each of the indicated vectors was transfected in triplicate in differentiated granulosa cells that had been cultured in the presence of FSH (50 ng/ml) and testosterone (10 ng/ml) for 48 h. After 4 h of incubation, PRL(1  microg/ml)was added for 6 h. Luciferase activity (light units) was measured in 20  microl cell lysate and normalized to the amount of protein. The relative luciferase activity is represented as the mean (light units/ microg)  plus or minus  SEM.
  Stat Binding Sites Are Critical for PRL Induction of the 2M Promoter To specifically determine the function of the Stat- binding sites in the context of the intact 1.2-kb 2M promoter, each of the Stat-binding sites was mutated or both of the sites were deleted. The pSV1.2-kb 2M construct and the mutant promoter-luciferase pSV constructs (16) were transfected into differentiated granulosa cells. As shown in Fig. 2, PRL induced a 2- to 3-fold increase in luciferase activity from the intact promoter-reporter construct. Although the level of luciferase activity of the promoter in the pSV promoter-reporter constructs was low (as compared with the pGL3 constructs, Fig. 1), the inducibility by PRL was similar. Deletion of both Stat-binding sites or mutation of either site abolished inducibility by PRL. Basal activity was not markedly altered except for the reduced activity in the proximal Stat 5 mutant construct. These results clearly show that both Stat- binding sites are required for PRL inducibility of promoter activity in granulosa cells but not for the high basal activity of the constructs.
View larger version (21K):    Figure 2. Both the Stat Factor-Binding Sites Are Required for the 2M Promoter Activity
To determine the function of the Stat binding sites in the context of the endogenous intact promoter, either one of the Stat-binding sites was mutated or both were deleted. These constructs were then transfected into differentiated granulosa cells. Luciferase activity was measured in 20  microl cell lysate, normalized to the amount of protein.
  PRL-Induced DNA-Binding Activity Contains Stat 5a and Stat 5b To determine the specific factors binding to the PRLRE, we used electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) in which the labeled oligonucleotide probe consisted of two copies of the proximal Stat-binding site of the 2M promoter (2MGAS2) (16). Because activated (phosphorylated) Stat proteins bind DNA whereas the nonphosphorylated Stats do not, the activated factors are readily detected in EMSAs. Accordingly, whole cell extracts (WCEs) were prepared from differentiated granulosa cells before or 15 min after PRL treatment, incubated with labeled 2M GAS2 probe, and resolved by electrophoresis. One slow migrating protein/DNA complex was formed with the WCE from PRL-treated cells but was not observed in WCE prepared from untreated cells (Fig. 3A, arrow). To identify the Stat factor(s) present in the slow migrating complex, WCEs were preincubated with antibodies to either Stat 5a or Stat 5b. The PRL-induced complex was partially supershifted by the Stat 5a antibody, as shown previously (10). A specific Stat 5b antibody resulted in retardation of the entire PRL-induced protein/DNA complex (Fig. 3A, asterisk) as was observed in extracts isolated from PRL-stimulated corpora lutea (11). These data indicate that in differentiated granulosa-luteal cells, as in luteal tissue from pregnant rats (11, 12), PRL activates Stat 5b as well as Stat 5a and that Stat 5b is the predominant isoform in these cells.
View larger version (54K):    Figure 3. Activation and Phosphorylation of Stat5b in Differentiated Granulosa Cells by PRL
A, PRL-induced DNA-binding activity present in granulosa cells contains Stat 5a and Stat 5b. WCEs isolated from untreated and PRL-treated (15 min) granulosa cells were incubated with labeled oligonucleotide 2MGAS2 (5'- GATCATCC TTCTGGGAATTCTGATATCCTTCTGGGAATTCTG- 3') and analyzed on EMSA. The arrow indicates the specific PRL-induced DNA protein complex formed. WCEs from PRL-treated granulosa cells were preincubated with antisera to Stat 5a and Stat 5b antibodies (30 min/4 C) before the addition of radiolabeled double-stranded oligonucleotide 2MGAS2. The PRL-induced DNA-protein complex is super-shifted partially by the Stat 5a antibody and completely by Stat 5b antibody (*). B and C, PRL induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat 5b. For immunoprecipitations, 30  microl immobilized Protein A on tryacryl beads were incubated with 200  microg WCEs, for 1 h at 4 C with shaking. After a brief spin, the supernatant was incubated with 1  microl Stat 5b antibody and 20  microl beads for 24 h at 4 C with shaking. Each of the samples was then washed three times with WCE buffer to remove unbound proteins. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads by addition of equal volume of SDS-loading buffer and boiled at 100 C for 10 min. Samples were electrophoresed on a 10% SDS-polyacylamide gel, transferred to an immobilion membrane, and blotted with antiphosphotyrosine antibody (B). The same blot was stripped and immunoblotted with anti-Stat 5b antibody (C).
  PRL Induces Tyrosine Phosphorylation of Stat 5b To demonstrate that the activated Stat 5b in granulosa cells was phosphorylated as a consequence of PRL stimulation, immunoprecipitation experiments were performed. WCEs were prepared from granulosa cells before and at selected time points after PRL treatment. WCEs were incubated with a specific Stat 5b antibody. The immunoprecipitate was resolved by SDS-PAGE, and tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat 5b was identified by an antiphosphotyrosine antibody (PY20) used in the Western blotting procedure. As shown in Fig. 3B, WCEs from untreated cells do not contain detectable amounts of tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat 5b, whereas WCEs prepared within 15 min of PRL treatment contained significant levels of phospho-Stat 5b. Phosphorylated Stat 5b remained present but at lower levels at 6 h and 20 h after PRL treatment (Fig. 3B).
To ensure that relatively equal amounts of Stat 5b were present in each immunoprecipitate, the same blot was reprobed with an anti-Stat 5b antibody. As shown in Fig. 3C, similar amounts of Stat 5b were immunoprecipitated from each of the samples. These data show that PRL rapidly stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat 5b in granulosa-luteal cells but that, even in the presence of continuous exposure to PRL, the amount of phospho-Stat 5b decreases progressively with time, coincident with reduced DNA-binding activity (data not shown and Ref. 10).
Stat 5b Is a Key Regulator of 2M Gene Expression in the Ovary Having established that Stat 5b, rather than Stat 5a, is the major Stat 5 protein activated in these granulosa-luteal cells and knowing that Stat 3 fails to bind the 2M PRLRE (10, 11), we sought to determine whether disruption of Stat 5b binding to the promoter would abolish promoter activity. For this we cotransfected into differentiated granulosa cells vectors expressing either wild-type Stat 5b or a truncated, splice variant form of Stat 5b (Stat 5b-40C) that has been shown to act in a dominant negative fashion to suppress Stat 5b function in other cells (25, 26). A reporter construct containing four copies of the proximal Stat-binding site ligated to the minimal 2M promoter-luciferase gene (4XGAS 2M) was chosen as the reporter construct since in previous studies (10, 16) it has been shown to exhibit a greater response to PRL treatment than the intact 2M promoter. When wild-type Stat 5b expression vectors were cotransfected with the 4XGAS 2M luciferase construct, the PRL-induced response was similar to cells cotransfected with the empty vector (Fig. 4), indicating that endogenous amounts of Stat 5b were already in excess. In contrast, PRL-induced activation of the promoter-reporter construct was significantly repressed by cotransfection of the vector expressing the truncated variant of Stat 5b (Fig. 4). These data indicate that PRL induction of 2M in differentiated granulosa cells is dependent on activation of Stat 5b and that the truncated splice-variant of Stat 5b can act as a dominant negative factor in granulosa cells as it does in other cells (25, 26).
View larger version (18K):    Figure 4. Truncated Stat 5b Acts as a Dominant Negative Factor in Differentiated Granulosa Cells
Expression vectors of the long (Stat 5b) and truncated form (Stat 5b-40C) of Stat 5b were cotransfected as above with 4xGAS-2M promoter-reporter construct, containing four copies of the proximal Stat-binding site. Luciferase activity is presented as the mean  plus or minus  SEM of activity obtained for each construct done in triplicate.
  SF-1 and COUP-TF Are Present in Granulosa Cells and Bind the Proximal Promoter of the 2M Gene The 109-bp fragment (-153/-43 bp) which, when deleted, totally abolished functional activity of promoter-reporter constructs (Fig. 1; -209 2M) was analyzed for potential transcription factor- binding sites. Putative binding sites for orphan members of the nuclear transcription factor family, SF-1, and COUP-TF (Fig. 5A) were present in the 45-bp region of this fragment. The sites for COUP-TF included an imperfect direct repeat (DR) separated by one nucleotide (designated DR1) and another direct repeat that contains a variant repeat of A/GGGTCA separated by two nucleotides, designated DR2. On the opposite strand between DR1 and DR2, a putative SF-1 site was identified that contains one nucleotide mismatch from the consensus hexameric sequence (CA)AGGTCA (Fig. 5A). Based on sequence identity and the binding studies described below, we have referred to this region as the orphan receptor response element (ORRE).
View larger version (52K):    Figure 5. Sequence and Functional Binding Sites for COUP-TF and SF-1 in the 2M ORRE
A, Sequence comparison of the ORRE to consensus binding sites for members of the nuclear orphan receptor family. The ORRE contains two potential COUP-TF binding sites designated direct repeats (DR), DR1 and DR2. The SF-1 binding site is present on the opposite strand between DR1 and DR2. Consensus sequences are represented in bold. Identical nucleotides are indicated with lines. B, SF-1 and COUP-TF bind the 2M promoter. WCEs obtained from differentiated granulosa cells were incubated with labeled oligonuleotide ORRE various cold competitors, as indicated, and analyzed by EMSA. The sequence of each oligonucleotide is described in Materials and Methods. Arrows indicate the specific DNA protein complexes formed. WCEs from differentiated granulosa cells were preincubated with antisera to COUP-TF or SF-1 (30 min/4 C) before the addition of radiolabeled ORRE. Antisera against COUP-TF reacts with Complex A and antisera against SF-1 reacts with complex B. Supershifts are indicated by (*).
  To determine whether these factors were present in the differentiated granulosa cells and could bind to the ORRE, EMSAs were performed. A 50 mer oligonucleotide spanning the ORRE was used as a labeled probe and incubated with WCE obtained from untreated and PRL-treated granulosa cells. Since identical complexes were observed with either WCE (data not shown), only the results obtained with WCE not exposed to PRL are presented (Fig. 5B). As shown, two major protein/DNA complexes were formed. The slower migrating complex, designated complex A, consists of two bands (thin arrow); the faster migrating complex is designated complex B (thick arrow). Formation of both these complexes was inhibited by the addition of 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled ORRE oligonucleotide, indicating that each of these complexes contains a protein(s) capable of binding to the probe. When a 20-bp oligonucleotide encompassing a consensus COUP-TF-binding site (Materials and Methods) was added to the reaction, the formation of complex A but not complex B was abolished (Fig. 5B). When oligonucleotides spanning either the putative COUP-TF-binding DR1 or DR2 regions (Materials and Methods) of the 2M promoter were added, neither altered the formation of complex A or complex B at the 100-fold molar excess. However, when oligonucleotides containing both DR1 and SF-1 (DR1SF-1) or DR2 and SF-1 (DR2SF-1) (Materials and Methods) were added, each reduced the formation of complex A as well as complex B.
To confirm the identification of proteins present in granulosa cell extracts, the WCEs were incubated with specific antisera to either COUP-TF or SF-1. Antisera to COUP-TF specifically supershifed both the bands of complex A (*). Previous data show that this antiserum recognizes both COUP-TFI and COUP-TF-II (27). This COUP-TF antiserum also diminished the binding of in vitro translated COUP-TF to ORRE (data not shown). The SF-1- specific antiserum retarded complex B (*) but not complex A, indicating a specific interaction of the antibody to this major protein-DNA complex. Collectively, these data indicate that the SF-1 (complex B) and COUP-TF (complex A) bind the 2M promoter. Furthermore, the functional binding sites appear to be overlapping rather than distinct.
Mutation of the SF-1 Binding Site Alters COUP-TF Binding to the ORRE To determine whether the nucleotides required for the binding of SF-1 and COUP-TF to the 2M promoter were overlapping, mutations within the ORRE were generated (Materials and Methods). Mutations in both DR1 and DR2 (Mutant 1; M1) were made to selectively eliminate the putative binding sites of COUP-TF; mutations in the SF-1-binding site were generated to block the binding of SF-1 (M2) (Materials and Methods). When EMSAs were performed with M1 as the labeled probe (Fig. 6A, left panel), one major complex was formed (arrow). This complex was competed with 50-fold and 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled M1. The antibody to COUP-TF failed to affect the mobility of the major complex binding to M1, whereas the antibody to SF-1 supershifted the major complex (*). These results indicate that mutations within DR1 and DR2 inhibited COUP-TF binding without altering the binding of SF-1 to the ORRE.
View larger version (60K):    Figure 6. Binding Characteristics of Mutant SF-1 and COUP-TF-Binding Regions
A, Analysis of mutant SF-1- and COUP-TF-binding sites. WCEs obtained from differentiated granulosa cells were incubated with labeled oligonuleotide containing either mutation in both DR1 and DR2 (M1) or mutation in the SF-1 site (M2) and analyzed by EMSA. The sequences of both M1 and M2 are described in Materials and Methods. Arrow indicates the specific DNA protein complex formed with M1. WCEs from differentiated granulosa cells were preincubated with antisera to COUP-TF/SF-1 (30 min/4 C) before the addition of radiolabeled M1/M2. Supershift of the specific complex with antisera against SF-1 is indicated by (*). B, Mutation of the SF-1 site alters the affinity of COUP-TF to ORRE. WCEs obtained from differentiated granulosa cells were incubated with labeled oligonuleotide ORRE. The oligonuleotide containing mutation in the SF-1 site (M2) was used as a cold competitor at various concentrations. The arrow indicates the specific DNA protein complex formed with ORRE. WCEs from differentiated granulosa cells were preincubated with antisera to COUP-TF (30 min/4 C) before the addition of radiolabeled ORRE. Supershift of the specific complex with antisera against COUP-TF is indicated by (*).
  When the SF-1 mutant (M2) oligonucleotide was used as the labeled probe in EMSAs, no specific protein-DNA complexes containing SF-1 or COUP-TF were observed (Fig. 6A, right panel). The absence of SF-1 binding was expected. However the absence of COUP-TF was unexpected because both DR1 and DR2 sites were intact. Thus mutation of the SF-1 site altered not only the binding of SF-1 but also that of COUP-TF. When labeled M2 was incubated with in vitro translated COUP-TF, the binding of COUP-TF was markedly diminished compared with the intact ORRE (data not shown). Based on these observations, we concluded that the SF-1 site of the 2M promoter appeared to enhance, stabilize, or directly bind COUP-TF.
To determine if the mutation of the SF-1 site within the 2M promoter altered the binding affinity of COUP-TF to the ORRE, additional EMSAs were run in which the intact 50-mer ORRE was used as the labeled probe. As previously, unlabeled ORRE reduced the formation of complexes A and B whereas the COUP-TF antibody supershifted complex A but not complex B (Fig. 6B). When the SF-1 mutant M2 oligonucleotide was used at 100-, 500-, and 1000-fold molar excess, no reduction in the binding of SF-1 was observed. However, M2 did compete for the binding of COUP-TF (thin arrow), albeit less effectively than unlabeled ORRE. A 1000-fold molar excess of M2 was required to achieve the same inhibition as a 100-fold molar excess of the intact ORRE (Fig. 6B). These results indicate that mutation of the SF-1 site reduces the affinity or stability but does not completely prevent the binding of COUP-TF to the 2M promoter.
SF-1 and COUP-TF Exert Opposing Effects on the Functional Activity of the 2M Promoter SF-1 is known to be a positive regulator of many genes (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9), whereas the effects of COUP-TF are more complex and can be either positive or negative (17, 28). In addition, both exhibit tissue-specific effects as indicated by the phenotypes of mutant mice lacking SF-1 (1) or COUP-TFI/II (Refs. 17, 29 ; and Y. Qu, F. A. Pereira, S. Y. Tsai, and M.-J. Tsai, personal communication). To analyze the functional roles of SF-1 and COUP-TF in regulating activation of the 2M promoter, specific mutations that abolished the binding of SF-1 or COUP-TF (Fig. 6) were generated within the -3712M promoter-reporter construct using PCR- directed mutagenesis techniques (Materials and Methods). These constructs were then transfected into differentiated granulosa cells. After 4 h, cells were treated with/without PRL for 6 h. Luciferase activity was measured, normalized to the amount of protein present in the sample, and then expressed as activity/ microg protein. As expected, PRL induced a 2- to 3-fold increase in luciferase activity from the intact -371 2M promoter-reporter construct (Fig. 7). Mutation of the SF-1 site (mSF-1) that prevents SF-1 binding and reduces the affinity of COUP-TF binding (Fig. 6A/B) markedly decreased basal activity of the reporter gene but did not prevent the 3-fold increase in response to PRL (Fig. 7). In contrast, the COUP-TF mutant (mCOUPTF) construct that retains an intact SF-1 binding site but fails to bind COUP-TF showed a 5-fold increase in basal promoter activity. Although the fold increase by PRL was somewhat reduced, an effect of PRL was observed. When both the SF-1 and the COUP-TF sites (mSF-mCOUPTF) were mutated, basal and PRL-stimulated luciferase activities were similar to that of the intact promoter-reporter construct. Collectively, these data document that within the ORRE of the 2M promoter, SF-1 acts as a positive regulator whereas COUP-TF acts as a repressor of transcriptional activation. Combined with the data from the EMSAs, these results indicate that although mutation of the SF-1 site decreases the affinity of COUP-TF binding to the 2M promoter, COUP-TF binds this region (albeit with reduced affinity) and retains potent repressor activity. Thus, both of these nuclear receptors appear to control the basal activity of the 2M promoter in granulosa-luteal cells but do not markedly alter the response to PRL.
View larger version (18K):    Figure 7. SF-1 and COUP-TF Are Required for 2M Promoter Activity
Mutations of specific bases within the SF-1- and/or COUP-TF-binding sites were generated using PCR mutagenesis technique. Each of the indicated vectors was transfected in triplicate in differentiated granulosa cells as above. Luciferase activity (lights units/ microg) is presented as the mean  plus or minus  SEM of activity obtained for each construct done in triplicate.
  Molecular Mechanisms by which FSH and T Control Expression of 2M in Granulosa Cells The identification of SF-1 and COUP-TF as factors binding to and regulating the functional activity of the ORRE of the 2M promoter prompted us to determine whether these factors regulated the basal activity of this promoter at different stages of granulosa cell differentiation. Specifically, FSH has been shown to regulate the expression of numerous genes in granulosa cells that contain SF-1 binding sites. The list of genes includes aromatase (6), P450scc (7), MIS (8), and, more recently, the receptor for PRL (31). This latter observation indicated that not only the basal activity of 2M promoter, but also the PRL inducibility of 2M gene might be dependent on several aspects of FSH-mediated differentiation of granulosa cells. Therefore, we analyzed and compared both basal and PRL- induced expression of 2M in immature granulosa cells and in cells differentiated in the presence of FSH and T. The expression of the endogenous 2M gene has been compared with the activity of 2M promoter-luciferase-reported constructs transfected into similar immature and differentiated cells. Furthermore, the expression of the endogenous gene and the transgene has been related to the expression of PRL receptors (PRLRs), activation of Stat 5, and the relative levels of SF-1 and COUP-TF.
To analyze the expression of the endogenous gene, granulosa cells were isolated from estradiol-primed immature rats. The cells were either cultured in serum-free medium without hormones for 24 h or were cultured with FSH/T for 48 h. PRL was added to the hormone-free (undifferentiated) and hormone-induced (differentiated) cell cultures for 24 h. Total RNA was isolated, and 2M transcripts were analyzed by Northern blots. As shown in Fig. 8A, 2M mRNA was not present in the undifferentiated cells in the absence or presence of PRL. In contrast, PRL did induce 2M mRNA in the differentiated cells. Thus, in the absence of FSH/T, PRL is unable to stimulate transcription of the endogenous 2M gene, confirming previous studies in vivo (11) and in vitro (32, 33).
View larger version (23K):    Figure 8. FSH/T-Induced Differentiation of Granulosa Cells Is Required for Expression of 2M mRNA and Promoter Activity
A, PRL fails to induce 2M transcripts in undifferentiated granulosa cells. Undifferentiated (-FSH/T, 24 h) and differentiated (+FSH/T, 48 h) granulosa cells were placed in culture, followed by addition of PRL (1  microg/ml, 24 h). Total RNA (20  microg) was used for Northern blot analysis. B, Functional activity of the 2M promoter is dependent on granulosa cell differentiation. The -3712M construct was transfected in triplicate into granulosa cells that had been cultured in the presence or absence of FSH and T. After 4 h of incubation, PRL (1  microg/ml) was added for 6 h. Luciferase activity (lights units/ microg) is presented as the mean  plus or minus  SEM of activity obtained for each construct done in triplicate.
  Similar cultures were then set up and transfected with the -3712M promoter-reporter construct to analyze the activity of these chimeric genes in the absence and presence of PRL. As shown in Fig. 8B, basal luciferase activity of the -371 2M promoter-reporter construct was low in undifferentiated granulosa cells and was not increased by the addition of PRL. In contrast, basal luciferase activity was 10-fold higher in the differentiated cells, and PRL induced a further 2- to 3-fold increase in activity. The marked differences in the activity of the transgene in these two stages of granulosa cell differentiation were not related to transfection efficiency since an SV40 enhancer-promoter construct gave similar activity (20,000 mean light units  plus or minus  SEM per  microg protein) when transfected into each culture. Based on these observations that FSH- and T-induced differentiation altered both basal and PRL-regulated activities, we sought to determine what changes in the PRL-response system or in the ratio of SF-1 and COUP-TF might account for these marked differences.
To determine whether PRL could stimulate activation of Stat 5b/5a in undifferentiated granulosa cells, WCEs were isolated from FSH/T-treated (48 h) or untreated (24 h) granulosa cells before and after PRL treatment (15 to 30 min). Several protein/DNA complexes were formed when WCE prepared from immature granulosa cells before and after their exposure to PRL were added to the labeled 2MGAS2 probe. However, only extracts prepared within 15 min after PRL addition to FSH/T-treated cells (Fig. 9A) formed a specific slow migrating complex, which is composed primarily of Stat 5b with lesser amounts of Stat 5a (Figs. 3A and 9A). Immunoblot analysis using WCEs prepared from FSH/T treated (48 h) or untreated (24 h) granulosa cells before and after PRL treatment (15/30 min), and Stat 5b antibody shows similar levels of protein in both the immature and the FSH/T-stimulated cells (data not shown). Thus, although Stat 5b protein is present in undifferentiated granulosa cells, PRL is unable to activate it in these cells (i.e. before exposure to FSH/T).
View larger version (43K):    Figure 9. PRL Receptor Activity and mRNA Content in Undifferentiated and Differentiated Granulosa Cells
A, PRL fails to activate Stat 5b in undifferentiated granulosa cells. WCEs were isolated from cultured granulosa cells before and after PRL treatment (15 min) from undifferentiated (-FSH/T, 24 h) or differentiated (+FSH/T, 48 h) cells. WCEs were incubated with a radiolabeled, double-stranded oligonucleotide 2MGAS2 as above. The protein/DNA complexes were analyzed by EMSA. B, Expression of PRLR mRNAs in undifferentiated and differentiated granulosa cells. RNA was isolated from uncultured, undifferentiated (-FSH/T, 24 h) and differentiated (+FSH/T, 48 h) granulosa cells. Specific primers to the long and the short form of the PRLRs were used in a RT-PCR assay using 350 ng RNA. PCR amplification was performed for 20 cycles as described in Materials and Methods. PCR products were resolved on a nondenaturing gel and quantified using Storm860 PhosphoImager.
  One explanation for the transactivation of 2M in differentiated cells, but not in immature cells, is the level of PRLRs in these cells. Three forms of the PRLRs have been identified in the rat. The short receptor is an alternatively spliced product of the long form (L-PRLR). The Nb2 form expressed in T cells is identical to L-PRLR but lacks 198 aa in the cytoplasmic domain. Studies have shown the long form to be functional in the ovary. Specific primers to the long and the short form of the PRLRs were used in an RT-PCR assay using RNA isolated from uncultured cells, undifferentiated granulosa cells (-FSH/T, 24 h), and differentiated cells (+FSH/T, 48 h). The amplified receptor mRNA products were normalized to the endogenous ribosomal L19-amplified band (Fig. 9B). The long form of the PRLR was detected at significant levels in immature granulosa cells before culture. However, in the absence of hormone, the levels of PRLR decreased progressively at 24 and 48 h of culture (Fig. 9B). In contrast, cells cultured with FSH/T for 48 h expressed 5-fold more message for the long PRLR and exhibited detectable amounts of the short form of the receptor (Fig. 9B). These data indicate that the ability of PRL to induce 2M in these differentiated cells is related, in part, to the induction-maintenance of PRLR in these cells. However, since PRL does not induce 2M in immature cells that also express the long form of the PRLR, additional factors regulating either the PRL-signaling cascade or the A-kinase system must be regulated by FSH/T as the granulosa cells differentiate.
Based on the opposing actions of SF-1 and COUP-TF in regulating the basal activity (Fig. 7), we sought to determine whether changes in the relative amounts of these factors might be related to increase of 2M mRNA expression in differentiated cells compared with immature cells. EMSAs were performed using labeled ORRE and extracts prepared from either immature/undifferentiated granulosa cells (in which 2M is not induced) or from FSH/T- treated/differentiated granulosa cell extracts (Fig. 10A). Quantification of the specific complexes was performed to determine the relative amounts of the SF-1 and COUP-TF binding to the ORRE. As shown (Fig. 10B), a relative increase in SF-1 binding (6-fold) compared with COUP-TF was detected in the FSH/T-treated granulosa-lutein cells. These results indicated that a relative increase in the positive regulator SF-1 may enhance the basal promoter activity.
View larger version (28K):    Figure 10. Levels of SF-1 and COUP-TF-Binding Activity in Undifferentiated and Differentiated Granulosa Cells
A, Relative increase in SF-1 and COUP-TF binding to the ORRE in differentiated granulosa cells. WCEs obtained from immature and differentiated (FSH/T, 48 h) granulosa cells were incubated with labeled ORRE oligonuleotide. The protein/DNA complexes were analyzed by EMSA. B, Quantitative representation of SF-1 and COUP-TF binding to the ORRE. The SF-1 and COUP-TF protein/DNA complexes were quantified with Storm860 PhosphoImager. FSH-dependent differentiation of granulosa cells increases the relative amount of SF-1 binding to the ORRE compared with COUP-TF. Ratios (relative units) of SF-1 to COUP-TF binding are indicated in parentheses.
     DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   The expression of 2M in the rat ovary is dependent on the differentiation of granulosa cells to luteal cells (10, 11) as well as the presence, activation, and binding of a diverse set of transcription factors to the promoter of the 2M gene. In this study we have identified and functionally characterized the interactions of two regions of the 2M promoter. One region contains a PRLRE that is comprised of two Stat factor-binding sites and binds both Stat 5a and Stat 5b (Refs. 10, 11 and results herein). The other region contains an ORRE that binds the orphan nuclear receptors SF-1 (2, 3, 4) and COUP-TF (17, 18). We show herein that maximal functional activity of the 2M promoter depends on the independent activation of each region by the binding and interactions of these specific transcription factors, hormonal stimulation, and a differentiated granulosa-luteal cell phenotype.
When the studies described herein were originally initiated, we had shown that Stat 5a was expressed in rat granulosa cells, activated by PRL, and bound to the PRLRE of the 2M promoter. We have extended these observations by showing that both Stat-binding sites are critical for PRL-induced activity of the 2M promoter. Neither site alone in the context of the intact promoter exhibits significant functional activity. These results indicate that the two sites may interact to stabilize or increase the binding of coregulatory molecules that interact with the transcriptional machinery. As new information about the complexity of the Stat 5 family of transcription factors was reported (34, 35), reagents to these new family members allowed us to extend our initial observations. Using antibodies specific for Stat 5b, we show that not only is it present in the rat granulosa cells, it is expressed at higher levels than Stat 5a, is activated by PRL, and binds to the PRLRE of the 2M gene. These results obtained in granulosa-luteal cells in culture support those observed in luteal cells in vivo (10, 11). Antibodies to Stat 5b have allowed us to document that in differentiated granulosa cells Stat 5b is tyrosine phosphorylated and translocated to the nucleus in response to PRL. In addition, truncated, splice-variant forms of Stat proteins have been cloned. For the Stats in which truncated forms have been identified, Stat 1 (36, 37) Stat 3 (38), and Stat 5 (25, 26), the mutants lacking the transactivation domain have been shown to exert dominant-negative functions in transcription assays (25, 26, 36, 37, 38). When we coexpressed the truncated Stat 5b variant with the 2M promoter-luciferase reporter construct, PRL-induced activity was markedly impaired, supporting the hypothesis that Stat 5 is the major PRL-regulated activator of 2M promoter activity in the differentiated granulosa cells. Taken together, our results provide evidence that PRL-mediated signaling events that transactivate the 2M gene in the granulosa-luteal cells occur by mechanisms similar to those that regulate cytokine signal transduction of target gene activity in other tissues, such as mammary gland (13, 39, 40) and liver (35, 41). That Stat 5, especially Stat 5b, plays a major role in transducing PRL action in ovarian cells has been supported recently by the generation of mutant mice. Although female mice null for Stat 5a do not exhibit an overt ovarian phenotype (42), mice null for Stat 5b alone (43) are infertile and exhibit abnormal ovarian functions. Based on the luteal cell-specific expression of 2M in vivo as well as its regulation by PRL and Stat 5b in cultured cells, we predict that corpora lutea of the infertile mice either fail to express 2M or express it at a markedly reduced level.
Our results have also provided new evidence to indicate that other regions, in addition to the PRLRE, regulate the expression of 2M in granulosa-luteal cells. The region directly 3' of the PRLRE binds both SF-1 and COUP-TF and has been designated herein as the ORRE of the 2M promoter. When this region of the 2M promoter was deleted, leaving the PRLRE intact, transgene activity was reduced to baseline and PRL inducibility was abolished. Based on these initial observations, we predicted that Stat 5 binding to the PRLRE interacted synergistically with the orphan receptors binding to the 3'- regulatory region to confer maximal promoter activity. This initial hypothesis was supported by observations of others who have shown that Stats synergistically interact with a variety of other transcription factors and coregulatory molecules. In mammary epithelial cells, Stat 5 interacts with the glucocorticoid receptor for activation of the ss-casein gene by PRL (23, 44). In liver cells, Stat 3 synergizes (interacts) with glucocorticoid receptor for activation of the 2M gene by IL-6 (24). Stat 1 and Sp1 interact to activate ICAM-I promoter in human tracheobronchial epithelial cells (21). In addition, Stat 2 has been shown to bind CBP/p300 and enhance gene activation by interferon- (20). When site-specific mutations were generated in either the Stat 5, SF-1, or COUP-TF binding sites within the context of the intact 2M promoter, a different set of functional interactions was observed.
Mutation of either one or both Stat 5-binding sites markedly reduced PRL inducibility. As mentioned above, these results indicate that the functional activity of the PRLRE is dependent on the binding of Stat 5 to each site and that these two sites interact to confer maximal PRL inducibility. However, mutation of the Stat sites did not alter the high basal activity observed with the intact 2M promoter-reporter constructs compared with the -48 2M minimal promoter construct. Contrary to our initial hypothesis, these results indicated that the Stat sites acted independently of the factors binding to the ORRE. However, when site-specific mutations of the SF-1 site or the two COUP-TF binding sites were generated, marked changes in the basal activities of the mutant constructs were observed. The mutant SF-1 construct that failed to bind SF-1 exhibited markedly reduced basal activity, whereas the COUP-TF mutant construct that failed to bind COUP-TF, but did bind SF-1, exhibited elevated basal activity. These results indicated that SF-1 is a transcriptional activator and enhances 2M promoter activity, whereas COUP-TF acted as a corepressor to antagonize the activity of SF-1 and thereby reduce the functional activity of the intact 2M promoter. Thus, the 2M gene can be added to a growing list of genes that are regulated by SF-1 in ovarian cells and highlights the importance of SF-1 in many diverse functions within the gonads and adrenals as suggested by the phenotype of mice null for SF-1 (1). Furthermore, these observations provide the first evidence that COUP-TF is present and functional in ovarian granulosa cells and can regulate the expression of an ovarian gene. Although the actions of COUP-TF are complex and have been shown to be both stimulatory and inhibitory (17), our data indicate that COUP-TF acts as a corepressor of SF-1 action in the intact promoter of the 2M gene. This observation supports results obtained by one other study in which the effects of SF-1 were blunted by COUP-TF (5).
Although the mechanism by which COUP-TF blocks the actions of SF-1 on the 2M promoter have not been entirely defined, our data show an interesting juxtaposition and interaction of SF-1- and COUP-TF-binding sites. Of note, mutation of the SF-1 site reduced by 10-fold the binding affinity of COUP-TF for the DR1 and DR2 regions of the 2M promoter. From this, we conclude that the binding of COUP-TF to DR1 and DR2 overlaps the SF-1 site or adjacent sites. However, despite the dramatic reduction in the binding affinity of COUP-TF to the SF-1 mutant region, COUP-TF retained potent repressor activity as revealed by the markedly reduced basal activity of the SF-1 mutant construct. These interactions of SF-1 and COUP-TF indicate that any change in the relative levels or activity of these factors could markedly alter the basal activity of the 2M gene and thus its expression.
Both PRLRE and ORRE are dependent on the differentiation of granulosa cells. In the case of the PRLRE, granulosa cell differentiation is obligatory, in part, because of the increased expression of PRLRs on the cell surface. Increased PRLR number enhances the activation of Stat 5b, which is constituitively expressed in the same amount in immature as well as differentiated granulosa cells. In the case of the ORRE, the molecular basis for the enhanced activity of this region in differentiated cells, as opposed to immature cells, remains to be determined but likely involves altered functional activity and complex interactions of SF-1 or COUP-TF on the ORRE. As shown herein, the amounts and relative ratios of these two factors binding to the 2M ORRE are different in immature and differentiated granulosa cells. There is a relative 6-fold increase in SF-1 binding in differentiated granulosa cells compared with the immature granulosa cells. Therefore, increased basal activity of the 2M promoter may depend on the increased binding of this transcriptional activator. In addition, functional changes are likely to involve the selective phosphorylation of either factor or a coregulatory molecule. Phosphorylation of SF-1 would be predicted to increase activity of the ORRE, whereas phosphorylation of COUP-TF might decrease its repressor activity on the ORRE. The phosphorylation of either factor might alter the recruitment of other coregulatory molecules. Phosphorylation of SF-1 has been shown to occur in differentiated granulosa cells (45) and, therefore, may be a critical event in increasing both basal activity of 2M as well as increasing the expression of PRLR. In combination, these two events promote enhanced transcription of 2M by PRL. As mentioned above, most cells do not express SF-1 but do express COUP-TF. Therefore, it is possible that in these cells the repressor activity of COUP-TF is unopposed by any other transcription factor, thereby reducing expression of the gene.
In summary, we have shown that expression of the 2M gene in ovarian granulosa-luteal cells involves not only PRL-induced activation of Stat 5b/a but also the opposing interactions of SF-1 and COUP-TF on an ORRE. The close juxtaposition of these regions initially indicated that there might be a functional synergism between the factors binding to the PRLRE and the ORRE. However, using site-specific mutations, rather that deletion analyses, we have been able to show that these regions act independently of each other in the context of the intact 2M promoter.
   MATERIALS AND METHODS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Materials 17ss-Estradiol was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO); testosterone from Steroids (Keene, NH); ovine LH (NIH oLH-23), ovine FSH (NIH oFSH-76), and ovine PRL from the National Hormone and Pituitary Program (Baltimore, MD); forskolin (10  microM dissolved in ethanol) from Calbiochem (San Deigo, CA); and Biotrans nylon membrane (0.2  microm) and [32P]deoxy-CTP from ICN Biochemical (Cleveland, OH). TNT-coupled reticulocyte lysate system, large fragments of E.coli polymerase, T4 poly nucleotide kinase, and restriction enzymes were purchased from Promega Corp. (Madison WI); T4 DNA ligase and ss-Agarase from New England Biolabs (Beverly, MA), luciferin from BMB (Indianapolis, IN); coenzyme A from Pharmacia (Piscataway, NJ); Immobilon-P from Millipore Corp. (Bedford, MA); protein assay reagents and electrophoresis supplies from Bio-Rad (Richmond, CA); tissue culture reagents from GIBCO (Grand Island NY); rainbow molecular weight markers and the enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) detection system from Amersham (Arlington Heights, IL); and RNA ladder (0.24 to 9.5 kb) from Bethesda Research Laboratories and Life Technologies Inc. (Gaithersburg, MD). Immobolized protein A on tryacryl beads was purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL). A 3.5-kb fragment of the 2M cDNA was obtained from 4.2 kb full-length clone isolated from a rat liver cDNA expression library (46). This cDNA recognizes a single transcript (5.2 kb) for the 2M message by Northern analysis in tissues examined to date. Kodak film XAR-5 was from Eastman Kodak Co. (Rochester, NY). COUP-TFI cDNA was kindly provided by Dr. Ming-Jer Tsai, Baylor College of Medicine (Houston, TX). cDNA of Stat 5b and its splice variant, Stat 5b40C, were generous gifts from Dr. Georg H. Fey, Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nurenberg (Erlangen, Germany). A rabbit antiserum IgG fraction generated against the C-terminal peptide of Stat 5a was generously provided by Dr. Jeffrey Rosen, Baylor College of Medicine (Houston, TX). Antibodies to phosphotyrosine (PY20) were obtained from Transduction Laboratory (Lexington, KY). Antibodies were obtained from several sources. Antibodies to Stat 5b were generous gifts from Dr. Lothar Henninghausen, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH (Bethesda, MD); antibodies to SF-1 (Ad4BP) from Dr. Ken-ichirou Morohashi, Kyushu University (Fukuoka, Japan); and antibodies to COUP-TF from Dr. Constantin Flytzanis and Dr. Ming-Jer Tsai, Baylor College of Medicine (Houston, TX).
Animals Intact immature Sprague Dawley (23 days old) female rats were obtained from Harlan (Indianapolis, IN) and maintained under a 16-h light, 8-h dark schedule, with food and water ad libitum. Animals were treated in accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. All protocols were approved by the Institutional Committee on Animal Care and Use, Baylor College Of Medicine (Houston, TX). Rats were delivered on day 23 of age and weighed 50 to 55 g. Rats were injected sc on days 24 to 26 with 1.5 mg 17ss-estradiol in 0.2 ml propylene glycol.
Granulosa Cell Culture Ovaries isolated from immature rats primed with 17ss-estradiol were punctured with a 22-gauge needle to isolate granulosa cells. The granulosa cells were pooled and treated with trypsin (20  microg/ml) for 1 min, followed by the addition of soybean trypsin inhibitor (300  microg/ml) and DNAse (100  microg/ml) to remove necrotic cells (47). After washing the cells twice, they were cultured for 48 h in DMEM-Ham s F12 (DMEM:F12; 1:1) supplemented with a low dose of oFSH (50 ng/ml) and T (10 ng/ml) at 37 C in 95% air and 5% CO2. Granulosa cells were cultured for 24 h in the absence of FSH and T or for 48 h in the presence of FSH and T (47, 48). At each time period, cells were treated with PRL (1  microg/ml) or forskolin (10  microM). At indicated time points, total RNA was isolated for Northern analyses, WCEs were prepared for EMSAs, and immunoblots or the cells were used for transient transfections of various expression vectors.
RNA Isolation and Northern Analysis Extraction buffer containing 1% Nonidet P-40 was used for isolation of cytoplasmic RNA from granulosa cells (49). RNA samples were extracted with phenol-chloroform, ethanol precipitated, resuspended in water containing 0.1% dimethyl pyrocarbonate, and quantitated by measuring the absorbance at 260 nm. For Northern blot analyses, 20  microg RNA were denatured at 55 C for 15 min in 45% formamide-5.4% formaldehyde and resolved by electrophoresis at room temperature in a formaldehyde-agarose gel. To confirm equal loading of RNA samples and to determine the migration of the standards in the RNA ladder, the gel was stained with acridine orange. After transfer of the RNA to nylon membranes, the blots were baked, prehybridized, and hybridized with P32-labeled 2M cDNA probe. Blots were washed four times, 5 min/wash at room temperature in 2x saline sodium citrate, 0.1% SDS, followed by two washes, 15 min each, in 0.1% saline sodium citrate and 0.1% SDS at 55 C and exposed to film at -80 C.
Immunoprecipitations and Immunoblot Analyses Protein A on tryacryl beads (30  microl) was incubated with 200  microg WCEs for 1 h at 4 C with shaking. After a brief spin, the supernatant was incubated with 1  microl Stat 5b antibody and 20  microl diluted beads for 24 h at 4 C with shaking. Each of the samples was then washed three times with WCE buffer to remove unbound protein. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads by addition of an equal volume of SDS-loading buffer and boiled at 100 C for 10 min. Samples were resolved by 10% one-dimensional SDS-PAGE at 20 mA for 6 to 7 h. Electrophoretic transfer to Immobilon polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane was performed at 12 V overnight at 4 C. After blocking with 5% milk for 2 h, filters were incubated with PY20 antiphosphotyrosine antibody (1:250). The filters were then washed with Tris-buffered saline, 0.05% Tween (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, 0.05% Tween) (TBST). The blots were incubated with 1:10,000 of antirabbit-horseradish peroxidase or antimouse-horseradish peroxidase. Filters were then washed six times for 5 min each with TBST. ECL reagents were used to detect specific proteins as described by Amersham. The same blot was stripped (2% SDS, 50 mM ss-mercaptoethanol, 50 mM Tris, pH 6.8) for 2 h at 55 C. After extensive washes with TBST, the blot was reprobed with anti-Stat 5b antibody (1:10,000).
Plasmid Constructs The luciferase constructs pSVoA1.2 kb2M (from -1152 to +54 bp) and the Stat mutants have been described previously (16). All the luciferase constructs in Fig. 1 were generated by initially isolating the 1.2-kb HindIII fragment from pSVoA1.2 kb2M and ligating it to pGL3 basic luciferase vector from Promega to obtain 1.2 kb 2M. -3712M was generated by ligating the 425-bp fragment (StuI:HindIII digest of the 1.2-kb fragment) to pGL3 Basic SmaI:HindIII site. -209 2M was generated by ligating the 298-bp fragment (RsaI:HindIII digest of the 1.2-kb fragment) to pGL3 Basic SmaI:HindIII site. -1592M was generated by digesting -3712M with EcoRI and SacI, which deletes the PRLRE. -209 2M was digested with EcoRI:PvuII to generate -2092M in which the ORRE is deleted. -482M, the minimal 2M promoter, was created by a PvuII digest of -3712M. 4XGAS2M, containing four copies of the proximal Stat-binding site, has been described previously (16, 24). Stat 5b and a splice variant of Stat 5b (Stat 5b-40C) were cloned to the expression vector pSVsport GIBCO BRL (Grandland, NY) and have been described previously (32).
The mutations (indicated in lower case) within the ORRE (Fig. 5a) of the 2M promoter were created by PCR using the -317 2M as a template. The primers used include mutant antisense oligonucleotides to either the COUP-TF (M1) site or the SF-1 site (M2) and the external sense and antisense primers that would hybridize at each end of the promoter region. The double mutant was generated with the same external primers, mutant oligonucleotide, and the COUP-TF mutant construct as the template. The sequence of the oligonucleotides is as follows:
mCOUP-TF: 5'-ATtGttTAATTAttGCCAAGGTTAATTCCT-aAttCGTTAGtCAG-3'
mSF-1: 5'-ATGGCCTAATTACCGCCAAttTTAATTCCTGA-CCCGTTAGTCCAG-3'
double mutant: 5'-ATTGCCAAttTTAATTCCTAA-3'
sense: 5'-CGGGGTACCCCGCCTCCTTGCCAACTATT-CC-3'
antisense: 5'-GTGCAAACAGCTGCTCCCACCC-3'
Figure 11 is a schematic representation of the PCR-directed mutagenesis. The cloning procedure was as described in PCR protocols (50). The PCR products were separated and purified by 1.5% low-melt agarose gel using an overnight ss-agarase digestion (50). After the second round of PCR, the purified products were isolated, digested with KpnI and PvuII, and ligated using sites present in the multiple cloning cassette of -371 2M construct. All plasmids were sequenced in both directions by Sanger s dideoxy method (50).
View larger version (8K):    Figure 11.
  Transient Transfection Assay Plasmid DNA was purified from bacteria by alkaline lysis and centrifugation on CsCl gradients (51). Differentiated granulosa cells in culture were transfected with different plasmid constructs using a calcium phosphate precipitation technique (52). After 30 min incubation at room temperature, 300  microl of the precipitate were added to the cultures (3 ml) and incubated for 4 h at 37 C. Each construct was transfected in triplicate for each treatment. SV40 luciferase construct containing the SV40 promoter enhancer elements was used as a positive control in each of the transfection experiments. Cells were then washed twice with Ca++- and Mg++-free HBSS before feeding with fresh DMEM/F12 media containing FSH (50 ng/ml) and T (10 ng/ml) with or without PRL (1  microg/ml) or forskolin (10  microM) for 6 h. Cells were then washed with 1x PBS and lysed with lysis buffer (0.2 M Tris, pH 8, 0.2% Triton X-100). The soluble protein obtained after centrifugation was assayed for luciferase activity using a Monolight 2010 Luminometer (Analytical Luminesence Laboratories, San Diego, CA). The luciferase activity in 20  microl of each sample was normalized to the amount of protein, as measured by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad), and expressed as relative light units/ microg protein.
Oligonucleotides and Nomenclature The functionally active PRLRE of the 2M promoter contains two Stat- binding sites, AACTGGAAA and TTCTGGGAA (GAS) sequences, as described previously (24, 10). The sequence of 2MGAS2 oligonucleotide used in EMSA is 5'-GATCATCCTTCTGGGAATTCTGATATCCTTCTGGGAATTC-TG3'. The ORRE sequence shown in Fig. 5A was used to generate mutant oligonucleotides:
M1: 5'-CTGaCTAACGaaTtAGGAATTAACCTTGGCAATAA-TTAaaCaAT-3'
M2: 5'-ATGGCCTAATTACCGCCAAttTTAATTCCTGACCC-GTTAGCCAG-3'
Sequences of other oligonucleotides used in EMSAs are as follows:
DR1: 5'-CTGGCTAACGGGTCAGGAA-3'
DR2: 5'-TGGCGGTAATTAGGCCAT-3'
DR1SF-1: 5'-CTGGCTAACGGGTCAGGAATTAACCTTGG-3'
DR2SF-1: 5'-GGAATTAACCTTGGCGGTAATTAGGCCAT-3'
Consensus COUP-TF: 5'-TGTCTTAGAGGTCAAAGGTCAAAT-3' (28)
Hexameric SF-1: 5'-GAGTCTCCCAAGGTCATCCTTGT-TT-3' (6)
Oligonucleotides were synthesized, purified, and provided by Genosys, Inc. (Houston, TX).
Whole Cell Extracts and EMSA Granulosa cells were cultured with FSH and T for 24 h or 48 h and then treated with or without PRL (1  microg/ml) for 15 min, 6 h, and 20 h. The cells were harvested by scraping and lysed by three cycles of freeze thawing to prepare soluble extracts (53). Protein samples were measured (Bradford; Bio-Rad). All samples were stored at -70 C until EMSA and immunoblot analyses were done. EMSAs were performed as described previously (54). Briefly, WCE (10 to 15  microg per lane) were incubated for 30 min at room temperature with 50,000 to 60,000 cpm of end-labeled double-stranded oligonucleotide with or without the competitor DNA and 5  microg poly(deoxyinosinic-deoxycytidylic)acid in a final volume of 20  microl in a buffer containing 100 mM KCl, 15 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM MgCl2, and 12% glycerol. When antibodies were used, WCEs were incubated with 1  microl of the antiserum for 30 min on ice before addition of the labeled probe. Binding reactions were resolved by 5% acrylamide, 0.5x TBE (0.5 M Tris-0.5 M boric acid-0.01 M EDTA) buffer. Gels were dried under vacuum and heat and exposed to Kodak XAR film at -80 C.
RT-PCR For each RT reaction, 350 ng RNA were reverse transcribed as previously described (55, 56). PCR was performed as previously described (55). The sequence of primers used for the PRLRs is as follows:
Forward primer: 5'-ATACTGGAGTAGATGGAGCCAGGAGAGTTC-3' and specific
Reverse LPRLR: 5'-CTTCCGTGACCAGAGTCACTGTCG-GGATCT-3'
Reverse SPRLR: 5'-TCCTATTTGAGTCTGCAGCTTCAGTAGTCA-3'
Primers for L19 were used as an internal control. PCR was performed for 20 cycles (Perkin-Elmer/Cetus, Norwalk, CT) with a denaturing temperature of 92 C (1 min), an annealing temperature of 60 C (2 min), and an extension temperature of 72 C (3 min). Reaction (20  microl) was electrophoresed on a 5% polyacrylamide gel in 0.5x TBE buffer. The gels were dried and the bands quantified with Storm860 PhosphoImager (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA). Specific PCR products amplified for the LPRLR-422 bp and the SPRLR-332 bp were normalized to the L19 band from the same sample. Gels were also exposed to HyperFilm (Amersham) for 6 to 24 h at room temperature.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   The authors wish to thank Dr. Jeffrey Rosen and Dr. Ming-Jer Tsai, Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, for their helpful suggestions and reagents that were provided during the course of these experiments. The authors also thank Dr. Lothar Henninghausen, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH (Bethesda, MD) for the antibodies to Stat 5b, and Dr. Ken-ichirou Morohashi, Kyushu University (Fukuoka 812, Japan) for the SF-1 (Ad4BP) antibodies.
   FOOTNOTES   Address requests for reprints to: JoAnne S. Richards, Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030. e-mail: joanner@ bcm.tmc.edu.
Received for publication February 20, 1998. Revision received April 22, 1998. Accepted for publication May 12, 1998.
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Luo X, Ikeda Y, Parker KL 1994 A cell-specific nuclear receptor is essential for adrenal and gonadal development and sexual differentiation. Cell 77:481 to 490[Medline] Morohashi K, Honda S, Inomata Y, Handa H, Omura T 1992 A common trans-acting factor, Ad4-binding protein, to the promoters of steroidogenic P-450 s. J Biol Chem 267:17913 to 17919[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lala DS, Rice DA, Parker KL 1992 Steroidogenic factor 1, a key regulator of steroidogenic enzyme expression, is the mouse homolog of fushi tarazu-factor 1. Mol Endocrinol 6:1249 to 1258[Abstract] Honda S, Morohashi K, Nomura M, Takeya H, Kitajima M, Omura T 1993 Ad4BP regulating steroidogenic P-450 gene is a member of steroid hormone receptor super-family. J Biol Chem 268:7494 to 7502[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bakke M, Lund J 1995 Mutually exclusive interactions of two orphan receptors determine activity of a cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-responsive sequence in the bovine CYP17 gene. Mol Endocrinol 9:327 to 339[Abstract] Fitzpatrick SL, Richards JS 1997 Identification of a cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-response element in the rat aromatase promoter that is required for transcriptional activation in rat granulosa cells and R2C Leydig cells. Mol Endocrinol 8:1309 to 1319[Abstract] Liu Z, Simpson ER 1997 Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and SP1 are required for regulation of bovine CYP11A gene expression in bovine luteal cells and adrenal Y1 cells. Mol Endocrinol 11:127 to 137[Abstract/Free Full Text] Shen W-H, Moore CCD, Ikeda Y, Parker KL, Ingraham HA 1994 Nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor-1 regulates MIS gene expression: a link to the sex determination cascade. Cell 77:651 to 661[Medline] Wehrenberg U, Ivell R, Jansen M, von GS, Walther N 1994 Two orphan receptors binding to a common site are involved in the regulation of the oxytocin gene in the bovine ovary. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:1440 to 14444[Abstract] Dajee M, Kazansky AV, Raught B, Hocke G, Fey GH, Richards JS 1996 Prolactin induction of the alpha-2-macroglobulin gene in rat ovarian granulosa cells: Stat 5 activation, binding to the IL-6RE. Mol Endocrinol 10:171 to 184[Abstract] Russel D, Norman R, Dajee M, Liu X, Henninghausen L, Richards JS 1996 Prolactin inducded activation and binding of Stat proteins to the IL-6RE of the 2-macroglobulin (2M) promoter in the rat ovary. Biol Reprod 55:1029 to 1038[Abstract] Ruff SJ, Leers SS, Melner MH, Cohen S 1996 Induction and activation of Stat 5 in the ovaries of pseudopregnant rats. Endocrinology 137:4095 to 4099[Abstract] Standke G, Meier V, Groner B 1994 Mammary gland factor activated by prolactin in mammary epithelial cells and acute-phase response factor activated by interleukin-6 in liver cells share DNA binding and transactivation potential. Mol Endocrinol 8:469 to 477[Abstract] Wang Y, O Neal KD, Yu-Lee L 1997 Multiple PRL receptor cytoplasmic residues and Stat 1 mediate PRL signaling to the interferon regulatory factor-1 promoter. Mol Endocrinol 11:1353 to 1364[Abstract/Free Full Text] DaSilva L, Rui H, Erwin Ra, Howard OMZ, Kirken RA, Malabarba MG, Hackett RH, Larner AC, Farrar WL 1996 Prolactin recruits STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5 independent of conserved receptor tyrosines TYR402, TYR479, TYR515 and TYR580. Mol Cell Endocrinol 117:131 to 140[CrossRef][Medline] Hattori M, Abraham LJ, Northemann W, Fey GH 1990 Acute-phase reaction induces a specific complex between hepatic nuclear proteins and the interleukin-6 response element of the rat 2-macroglobulin gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:2364 to 2368[Abstract] Tsai SY, Tsai M-J 1997 Chick ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF): coming of age. Endocr Rev 18:229 to 240[Abstract/Free Full Text] Enmark E, Gustafsson J-A 1996 Orphan nuclear receptors-the first eight years. Mol Endocrinol 10:1293 to 1307[Medline] Cooney AJ, Tsai SY, O Malley BW, Tsai M-J 1992 Chick ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF) dimer binds to different GGTCA response elements, allowing COUP-TF to repress hormonal induction of the vitaminD3, thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors. Mol Cell Biol 12:4153 to 4263[Abstract] Battacharaya S, Eckner R, Grossman S, Oldread E, Arany Z, D Andrea A, Livingston DM 1996 Cooperation of Stat 2 and p300/CBP in signaling induced by interferon-. Nature 383:344 to 346[CrossRef][Medline] Look DC, Pelletier MR, Tidwell RM, Roswit WT, Holtzman MJ 1995 Stat 1 depends on transcriptional synergy with Sp1. J Biol Chem 270:30264 to 30267[Abstract/Free Full Text] Schaefer TS, Sanders LK, Nathans D 1995 Cooperative transcriptional activity of Jun and Stat 3ss, a short form of Stat 3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:9097 to 9101[Abstract] Stocklin E, Wissler M, Gouilleux F, Groner B 1996 Functional interactions between Stat 5 and glucocorticoid receptor. Nature 383:726 to 728[CrossRef][Medline] Hocke GM, Barry D, Fey GH 1992 Synergistic action of interleukin-6 and glucocorticoids is mediated by the interleukin-6 response element of the rat 2 macroglobulin gene. Mol Cell Biol 12:2282 to 2294[Abstract] Wang D, Stravopodis D, Teglund S, Kitazawa J, Ihle J 1996 Naturally occurring dominant negative variants of Stat 5. Mol Cell Biol 16:6141 to 6148[Abstract] Morrigel R, Gouilleux V, Jahne R, Berchtold S, Gartmann C, Liu X, Hennighausen L, Sotiropoulos A, Groner B, Gouilleux F 1996 Deletion of carboxyl terminal transactivation domain of MGF-Stat 5 results in sustained DNA binding and dominant negative phenotype. Mol Cell Biol 116:5691 to 5700 Mietus-SM, Sladek FM, Ginsburg GS, Kuo F, Ladias JA, Darnell JE, Karathanasis SK 1992 Antagonism between apolipoprotein AI regulatory protein I, COUP-TF and HNF4 modulates apolipoprotein CIII gene expression in liver and intestinal cells. Mol Cell Biol 12:1708 to 1718[Abstract] Leng X, Cooney AJ, Tsai SY, Tsai M-J 1996 Molecular mechanisms of COUP-TF-mediated transcriptional repression: evidence for transrepression and active repression. Mol Cell Biol 16:2332 to 2340[Abstract] Qui Y, Pereira FA, DeMayo FJ, Lydon JP, Tsai SY, Tsai M-J 1997 Null mutation of mCOUP-TFI results in defects in morphogenesis of the glosspharyngeal ganglion, axonal projection and arborization. Genes Dev 11:1925 to 1937[Abstract/Free Full Text] Deleted in proof Hu Z, Zhuang L, Guan X, Meng J, Dufau ML 1997 Steroidogenic factor-1 is an essential transcriptional activator for gonad-specific expression of promoter I of the rat prolactin receptor gene. J Biol Chem 170:14263 to 14271[CrossRef] Gaddy-Kurten D, Hickey GJ, Fey G, Gauldie J, Richards JS 1989 Hormonal regulation and tissue-specific localization of 2 macroglobulin in rat ovarian follicles and corpora lutea. Endocrinology 125:2985 to 2995[Abstract] Gaddy-Kurten D, Richards JS 1991 Regulation of 2 macroglobulin by luteinizing hormone and prolactin during cell differentiation in the rat ovary. Mol Endocrinol 5:1280 to 1291[Abstract] Liu X, Robinson GW, Gouilleux F, Groner B, Henninghausen L 1995 Cloning and expression of Stat 5 and a novel homologue Stat 5b involved in prolactin signal transduction in mouse mammary tissue. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:8831 to 8835[Abstract] Ripperger J, Fritz S, Hocke G, Lottspeich F, Fey G 1995 Transcription factors Stat 3 and Stat 5b are present in the rat liver nuclei late in an acute phase response and bind interleukin-6 response elements. J Biol Chem 270:29998 to 30006[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kuang AA, Novak KD, Kang SM, Bruhn K, Lenardo MJ 1993 Interaction between NF-kappa B- and serum response factor-binding elements activates an interleukin-2 receptor alpha-chain enhancer specifically in T lymphocytes. Mol Cell Biol 13:2536 to 2545[Abstract] Schindler C, Darnell JE 1995 Transcriptional responses to polypeptide ligands: the JAK/Stat pathway. Annu Rev Biochem 64:621 to 651[CrossRef][Medline] Caldenhoven E, Dijk TB, Solari R, Armstrong J, Raaijmakers J, Lammers JW, Koenderman L Groot RT 1996 Stat 3ss a spice variant of transcription factor Stat 3, a dominant negative regulator of transcription. J Biol Chem 271:13221 to 13227[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kazansky AV, Raught B, Lindsey SM, Wang Y-F, Rosen JM 1995 Regulation of MGF/Stat 5a during mammary gland development. Mol Endocrinol 9:1598 to 1608[Abstract] Liu X, Robinson GW, Henninghausen L 1996 Activation of Stat 5a and Stat 5b by tyrosine phosphorylation is tightly linked to mammary gland differentiation. Mol Endocrinol 10:1496 to 1506[Abstract] Akira S, Nishio Y, Inoue M, Wang XJ, Wei S, Matsusaka T, Yoshida K, Sudo T, Naruto M, Kishimoto T 1994 Molecular cloning of APRF, a novel INF-stimulated gene factor Stat 3 p91-related transcription factor involved in the gp130-mediated signaling pathway. Cell 77:63 to 71[Medline] Liu X, Robinson GW, Wagner K-U, Garret L, Wynshaw-Boris A, Henninghausen L 1997 Stat 5a is mandatory for adult mammary gland development and lactogenesis. Genes Dev 11:179 to 186[Abstract] Udy GB, Towers RP, Snell RG, Wilkins RJ, Park S-H, Ram PA, Waxman DJ, Davey HW 1997 Requirement of Stat 5b for sexual dimorphism of body growth rates, liver gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:7239 to 7244[Abstract/Free Full Text] Doppler W, Groner B, Ball RK 1989 Prolactin and glucocorticoid hormones synergistically induce expression of transfected rat ss-casein gene promoter constructs in a mammary epithelial cell line. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:104 to 108[Abstract] Carlone DL, Richards JS 1997 Functional interactions, phosphorylation and levels of 3',5'- cyclic adenosine monophosphate-regulatory element binding protein and steroidogenic factor-1 mediate hormone-regulated and constitutive expression of aromatase in gonadal cells. Mol Endocrinol 11:292 to 304[Abstract/Free Full Text] Gehring MR, Sheils BR, Northemann W, de Bruijn MHL, Kan CC, Chain AC, Noonan DJ, Fey GH 1987 Sequence of the rat 2 macroglobulin gene and acute phase control of its messenger RNA. J Biol Chem 262:446 to 454[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ratoosh SL, Richards JS 1985 Regulation of the content and phosphorylation of RII by cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate, follicle stimulating hormone and estradiol in cultured granulosa cells. Endocrinology 117:917 to 927[Abstract] Orly J, Sato G, Erickson GF 1980 Serum suppresses the expression of hormonally-induced functions in cultured granulosa cells. Cell 20:817 to 827[Medline] Pelham HRB 1982 A regulatory upstream promoter element in the Drosophila hsp 70 heat-shock gene. Cell 30:517 to 528[Medline] Ausubel FM, Brent R, Kingston RE, Moore DD, Seidman JG, Smith JA, Struhl K (eds) 1987 Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. John Wiley  and  Sons, New York Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T 1989 Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY Graham R, van der Eb A 1973 A new technique for the assay of infectivity of human adenovirus 5 DNA. Virology 52:456 to 457[Medline] Welte T, Garimorth K, Philipp S, Doppler W 1994 Prolactin-dependent activation of a tyrosine phosphorylated DNA binding factor in mouse mammary epithelial cells. Mol Endocrinol 8:1091 to 1102[Abstract] Garner MM, Revzin A 1981 A gel electrophoresis method for quantifying the binding of proteins to specific DNA regions: application to components of the E. coli lactose operon regulatory gene. Nucleic Acids Res 9:3047 to 3060[Abstract] Park OK, Mayo KE 1991 Transient expression of progesterone receptor messenger RNA in ovarian granulosa cells after the preovulatory luteinizing hormone surge. Mol Endocrinol 5:967 to 978[Abstract] Orly J, Rei Z, Greenberg N, Richards JS 1994 Tyrosine kinase inhibitor AG18 arrests follicle-stimulating hormone-induced granulosa cell differentiation: use of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay for multiple messenger ribonucleic acids. Endocrinology 134:2336 to 2346[Abstract]
