Characterization of the Human PPAR Promoter: Identification of a Functional Nuclear Receptor Response Element Ines Pineda Torra, Yalda Jamshidi, David M. Flavell, Jean-Charles Fruchart and Bart Staels
U.545 Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale (I.P.T., J.-C.F., B.S.), Departement d Atherosclerose, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59019 Lille, and the Faculte de Pharmacie, Universite de Lille II, 59006 Lille, France; and Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics (Y.J., D.M.F.), Department of Medicine, Royal Free and University College London Medical School, The Rayne Institute, London WC1E 6JJ, United Kingdom
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Bart Staels, U.545 INSERM, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 Rue Calmette BP245, 59019 Lille, France. E-mail: Bart.Staels{at}pasteur-lille.fr' + u + '@' + d + ''//-->.
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   PPAR is a nuclear receptor that controls lipid and glucose metabolism and exerts antiinflammatory activities. The factors regulating human PPAR (hPPAR) gene expression remain largely unexplored. To study the mechanisms controlling hPPAR expression, the hPPAR gene promoter was identified and characterized. First, an alternatively spliced exon within the 5'-untranslated region of the hPPAR gene was identified by RT-PCR. Next, the transcription start site was mapped and the hPPAR gene promoter was cloned and functionally analyzed. Because PPAR levels are elevated in tissues expressing the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 (HNF4), such as liver, the regulation of hPPAR by HNF4 was examined. Transient transfections in HepG2 and Cos cells showed that HNF4 enhances hPPAR promoter activity. 5'-Deletion and mutation analysis of the hPPAR promoter identified a regulatory element (RE) consisting of a degenerate hexamer repeat with a single nucleotide spacer (direct repeat 1), termed HNF4-RE. Gel shift assays demonstrated that HNF4 binds to this HNF4-RE. Furthermore, HNF4 increased the activity of a heterologous promoter driven by two copies of the HNF4-RE. The nuclear receptor COUP-TFII also bound this site and down-regulated basal as well as HNF4-induced hPPAR promoter activity. Finally, PPAR was shown to bind the HNF4-RE, leading to an induction of PPAR expression in hepatocytes. In summary, the organization of the 5'-flanking and untranslated region of the hPPAR gene was characterized and the hPPAR promoter region has been identified. Furthermore, these data demonstrate that the hPPAR gene is regulated by nuclear receptors, such as HNF-4, COUP-TFII, and PPAR.
   INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   PPAR [NR1C1] IS a ligand-activated transcription factor belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily that regulates gene transcription by heterodimerizing with RXR. PPAR/RXR heterodimers bind to PPAR response elements (PPREs) consisting of a direct repeat of the core AGGTCA sequence spaced by 1 or 2 bp [direct repeat 1 or 2 (DR1 or DR2)] preceded by a 5'-A/T-rich flanking sequence (1). In addition, PPAR represses gene transcription by interfering with the nuclear factor B (NFB) and activating protein 1 (AP1) signaling pathways in a DNA binding-independent fashion (2).
PPAR-mediated transcriptional regulation of target genes is tightly controlled by ligand activation. Fatty acid (FA) derivatives and the hypolipidemic fibrates are natural and synthetic PPAR ligands, respectively (3). PPAR mediates the action of fibrates on plasma lipid levels by regulating the transcription of genes controlling lipoprotein metabolism (4). Moreover, PPAR is a pivotal modulator of intracellular lipid metabolism by regulating the gene expression of proteins involved in FA uptake, FA esterification, FA entry into the mitochondria, peroxisomal and mitochondrial FA catabolism, and ketone body synthesis (1). In addition to intra- and extracellular lipid metabolism, glucose and energy homeostasis as well as body weight were also reported to be influenced by PPAR activators (5, 6). Furthermore, PPAR is an important regulator of vascular inflammation. PPAR inhibits the expression of various inducible factors implicated in the promotion of a local inflammatory response within the developing atherosclerotic plaque (2). In addition, PPAR regulates the expression of lipoprotein receptors and cholesterol transporters involved in the reverse cholesterol transport pathway in macrophages (7, 8). PPAR activators reduce plasma concentrations of inflammatory cytokines in vivo (9, 10) and reduce the progression of coronary atherosclerosis in humans (11, 12, 13, 14).
In addition to ligand activation, transcriptional control of PPAR target genes depends on its expression levels. High levels of PPAR expression are observed in tissues with elevated FA catabolic rates, such as liver, heart, kidney, muscle, and the large intestine (15, 16, 17). In rodents, PPAR is regulated by stress (18) and by different hormones, such as GH, glucocorticoids, insulin, and leptin (19, 20, 21, 22). PPAR expression oscillates diurnally (18), is diminished with age (23), and is induced during brown adipocyte differentiation (24). Furthermore, starvation increases PPAR expression levels in liver leading to changes in mRNA levels of PPAR target genes (25). Low PPAR mRNA levels result in decreased PPAR activity in pancreatic islets of obese Zucker diabetic (fa/fa) rats (22), in rat cardiomyocytes during cardiac hypertrophy (26), in livers of male Syrian hamsters upon lipopolysaccharide administration (27), and in intestinal epithelial cells during hypoxia (28). Moreover, PPAR expression levels correlate with human apo AI gene induction in response to fibrate treatment as demonstrated in human apo AI transgenic mice crossed with PPAR-deficient mice (29).
However, to date, studies addressing the regulation of PPAR gene expression have been largely performed either in rodent cells or in animal models. Although the regulation of PPAR expression in humans remains largely unknown, the observation that hepatic PPAR mRNA levels vary significantly among individuals (30, 31) suggests that PPAR is also regulated at the transcriptional level in humans. Indeed, hPPAR mRNA levels are induced during monocyte differentiation into macrophages (32), and high glucose concentrations up-regulate PPAR gene expression in human macrophages from healthy control subjects as well as from type 2 diabetic patients (33).
To understand the molecular mechanisms governing PPAR regulation, we decided to identify and functionally characterize the 5'-flanking region of the hPPAR gene. In the present manuscript the transcription start site was determined, and the upstream 5'-flanking region of the hPPAR gene was identified and cloned and its transcriptional activity was examined.1 In the course of these studies the sequence of the 5'-untranslated region (UTR) of the hPPAR gene was completed and an alternatively spliced exon within the 5'-UTR of the gene was identified. Finally, hPPAR promoter activity was shown to be regulated by the nuclear receptors hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4), chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II (COUP-TFII), and PPAR itself.
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Characterization of the 5'-UTR Structure of the hPPAR Gene and Identification of an Alternatively Spliced 5'-UTR Variant The hPPAR gene contains at least eight exons in which exons 1 and 2 and the 5'-end of exon 3 and the 3'-end of exon 8 are not translated (34, 35). The aim of our study was to determine the 5'-UTR structure of the hPPAR gene and to identify and characterize the hPPAR promoter. To identify noncoding exons within this region, different primers were designed and PCRs were carried out on reverse transcribed human liver RNA from two different subjects. Using this approach, a novel exon was discovered. When PCR was performed using a primer designed at the 3'-end of exon 2 (primer 13, Fig. 1A) and a primer hybridizing the 3'-end of exon 1 (primer 15C, Fig. 1A), a fragment of 158 bp containing both exon 1 and exon 2 was amplified (Fig. 1B, left), as expected. Additionally, a second fragment 150 bp longer was repeatedly coamplified even at stringent PCR conditions. Similar results were obtained with four other human liver and adipose tissue mRNA samples (data not shown), indicating that the unexpected additional PCR product corresponded to a rather common transcript. Cloning and sequencing of this PCR fragment revealed the presence of 156 bp of novel sequence downstream of the sequence previously known as exon 1 (Fig. 1C). Furthermore, when PCR was performed using a primer within the novel sequence (primer IP3) and the exon 1-specific primer 15C, a fragment was amplified, further indicating the existence of this additional exon (Fig. 1B, right). The novel sequence was located between exon 1 and 2 in a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone containing the hPPAR gene and was flanked by ag/gt consensus acceptor and donor splice sites, respectively (Fig. 1C). The newly identified exon was named exon 1b, by analogy to the nomenclature used for the alternatively spliced exon present in the 5'-UTR of the mouse PPAR gene (36), whereas the previously known exon 1 was renamed exon 1a (Fig. 1A). In addition, when 5'-RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA ends) reactions were carried out using primer IP3 located in exon 1b as gene-specific primer, a fragment covering the novel exon plus a sequence corresponding to exon 1a was amplified (data not shown), corroborating the existence of a second alternative transcript containing exon 1b in addition to exon 1a. This suggests that exon 1b is spliced out alternatively giving rise to two different transcripts with distinct 5'-UTRs (Fig. 1A). Thus, both mouse and human PPAR (hPPAR) genes display a similar 5'-UTR genomic organization. However, the noncoding exons do not show a significant degree of sequence homology among species (38% for exon 1a and 29% for exon 1b).
View larger version (29K):    Figure 1. Intron-Exon Structure of the 5'-UTR of the hPPAR Gene and Identification of an Alternative Spliced 5'-UTR Variant
A, Schematic representation of the 5'-UTR of the hPPAR gene and the identified spliced variants. The first coding exon (filled box) and the 5'-noncoding exons (hatched boxes) are depicted. Numbers over the boxes represent the exon length in base pairs. Oligonucleotides used for RT-PCR analysis are indicated by arrows. B, RT-PCR analysis on human liver RNA isolated from two different subjects. Total RNA was extracted, reverse transcribed, and amplified using primers 15C and 13 (left) or 15C and IP13 (right). -PCR corresponds to a PCR carried in the absence of RT product. C, Genomic sequence corresponding to the alternatively spliced exon 1b. Oligonucleotides IP3 and IP7 used for 5'-RACE analysis are indicated by arrows. The acceptor and donor splice sites are depicted in bold. Nucleotides in uppercase and lowercase letters correspond to exon and intron sequences, respectively.
  Determination of the Transcription Start Site To determine the hPPAR transcription start site, 5'RACE-PCR analysis was performed. Genomic sequence upstream of the previously reported exon 1a sequence (37) was obtained by primer walking the BAC clone containing the hPPAR gene. Despite the overall low degree of homology shown by the PPAR 5'-UTRs among different species, a sequence of around 60 bp was found to be 88% homologous to a region close to the transcription start site in the mouse PPAR 5'-UTR (Fig. 2A). This prompted us to examine whether the transcription start site in the human gene could also be upstream of this region. Accordingly, a primer close to that sequence (primer IP18, Fig. 2A) was used as gene-specific primer in a 5'-RACE-PCR. A 213-bp DNA fragment was amplified from human liver RNA (Fig. 2B) and subsequently sequenced. The most 5'-nucleotide before the poly-dC tail introduced by the 5'-RACE procedure mapped to a T and was designated as nucleotide +1 (Fig. 2A). Similar results were obtained when a different gene-specific primer (primer 5-GSP) was used in the 5'-RACE-PCR (data not shown). To confirm the results of the 5'-RACE experiments, ribonuclease (RNase) protection analysis was performed. RNase mapping with a 337-nucleotide labeled cRNA probe complementary to bp -22 to +213 (Fig. 2C) gave a major protected band of 213 bp (Fig. 2D), thus confirming the transcription start site that had been identified by 5'-RACE. These data indicate that exon 1a is considerably longer than the partially sequenced exon 1 that had been previously reported (34, 35, 37) and than the exon 1a identified in the mouse PPAR gene (36).
View larger version (64K):    Figure 2. Mapping of the Transcription Start Site of the hPPAR Gene by 5'-RACE and RNase Protection Analysis
A, Sequence corresponding to exon 1a in the 5'-UTR region. The oligonucleotides YGSP1, IP24, IP18, and 5-GSP used for 5'-RACE, RNase protection analysis, and cloning are indicated by arrows. The donor splice site is depicted in bold lowercase. The previously reported 5'-UTR sequence (37 ) is indicated in italics. Transcription start site (+1) is shown by an arrow. The sequence in bold uppercase represents a region showing 88% homology with both rat and mouse 5'-UTRs (see text for of the 5'-RACE products on an agarose gel. Total RNA from human liver was reverse transcribed and the cDNA was poly-(dC) tailed with terminal deoxynucleotide transferase (TdT) as described in Materials and Methods. dC-tailed cDNA (TdT+) or untailed cDNA (TdT-) were amplified using an universal primer (AAP) and a gene-specific primer (IP18). C, Schematic representation of the probe used for RNase protection analysis. A genomic DNA fragment (-22 to +213) was amplified with oligonucleotides IP24 and IP18 (depicted in panel A) and cloned into pBluescript SK+. Subsequently an antisense RNA probe was transcribed. The size of the protected fragment, as predicted by the 5'-RACE experiment shown in panel B, is indicated. D, Mapping of the transcription start site by RNase protection analysis. Autoradiograph of RNase protection analysis carried out on 20  microg of human liver total RNA extracted from two different subjects. The protected probe fragments (indicated by an arrow) correspond to those predicted in panel B.
  Cloning and Analysis of the 5'-Flanking Region of the hPPAR Gene To identify potential binding sites for transcription factors that may be important in the regulation of hPPAR gene expression, 1.6 kb of hPPAR sequence upstream of the transcription start site were cloned. No consensus TATA or CCAAT boxes were found within the first 100 bp, although a CCAAT box was observed at -472 bp (Fig. 3). Furthermore, this region possesses the characteristics of a TATA-less promoter, namely, GC-rich sequences and multiple putative Sp1 binding sites. Computer-assisted analysis (38) revealed several potential transcription factor binding sites including AP2, Egr-1, Egr-2, E box, NFB, and MZF-1 among others (Fig. 3).
View larger version (57K):    Figure 3. Nucleotide Sequence of the 5'-Flanking Region of the hPPAR Gene
Numbers are relative to the transcription start site (+1). The putative HNF4-RE is underlined. Putative transcription factor binding sites are indicated by open boxes.
  Functional Characterization of the hPPAR Promoter To determine the ability of hPPAR 5'-flanking region to drive basal transcriptional activity, sequences were fused to a luciferase reporter gene. Because hPPAR is highly expressed in liver (17), the 1,664-bp promoter-containing plasmid, p(H-H)-pGL3, was transiently transfected into human HepG2 hepatoma cells. Activity of this construct was about 8-fold the activity of the parental promoterless construct (pGL3 basic) in these cells (Fig. 4). Next, the promoter activity of different 5'-deletion constructs was evaluated. Deletion from -1,664 to -1,206 did not significantly affect the promoter activity. Truncation to -648 significantly reduced the luciferase activity in HepG2 cells. By contrast, in agreement with hPPAR tissue-selective expression, luciferase activities of the p(H-H)-pGL3 construct and its 5'-deletion mutants were only 2-fold higher than pGL3 basic in Cos-1 cells, a cell line that does not express PPAR. These experiments suggest that these cells are devoid of the factors driving basal hPPAR expression compared with HepG2 cells. The shortest construct, p(P-H)-pGL3, containing the GC-rich proximal promoter was only 2-fold more active relative to pGL3 basic vector in both cell lines compared with the 6-fold activity shown by the p(E-H)-pGL3 construct, which suggests that sequences between -536 and -1,664 may contain binding sites for key transcription factors driving basal hPPAR gene expression.
View larger version (11K):    Figure 4. Functional Analysis of hPPAR Promoter 5'-Deletion Mutants
The region spanning 1,664 bp of promoter and the first 83 bp of exon 1a was progressively deleted from its 5'-end, fused to the pGL3 basic vector, and transfected into the indicated cell types as described in Materials and Methods. Values (mean  plus or minus  SD) represent firefly luciferase activity normalized relative to a Renilla luciferase transfection internal control. Luciferase activities are shown relative to the activity of the pGL3 basic vector, which was arbitrarily set to 1.
  Identification of a Functional HNF4 Regulatory Element (HNF4-RE) in the hPPAR Promoter Because hPPAR is highly expressed in liver and the hPPAR 5'-flanking region shows significant promoter activity in HepG2 cells, the regulation of hPPAR promoter activity by HNF4, a nuclear receptor that is abundantly expressed in liver, was examined. To this purpose, transient transfection studies were performed with the p(H-H)-pGL3 construct in HepG2 cells. In the presence of increasing concentrations of HNF4, hPPAR promoter activity was induced in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig. 5A). To localize the region that confers HNF4 responsiveness within the hPPAR promoter, cotransfection assays were repeated with a series of 5'-deletion hPPAR promoter constructs (Fig. 5B). These experiments revealed that the HNF4 responsive region resides within the fragment flanked by HindIII and XhoI sites. Analysis of the sequence in this region of the hPPAR promoter revealed two potential hexamer binding sites separated by a single nucleotide between nucleotide -1,492 to -1,483 (Fig. 3), conforming to the DR1 response elements for HNF4 (HNF4-RE). To unequivocally characterize the imperfect DR1 as an HNF4 response element, HepG2 and Cos cells were transfected with a hPPAR promoter construct bearing two nucleotide mutations in the 5'-hexamer of the DR1 element, p(H-H)HNF4-REmut-pGL3. In contrast to the wild-type promoter construct p(H-H)-pGL3, the mutated promoter was not influenced by HNF4 cotransfection in both cell lines (Fig. 5C), thus demonstrating that the hPPAR HNF4-RE (HNF4-RE) indeed confers HNF4 response to the hPPAR promoter.
View larger version (17K):    Figure 5. HNF4-Mediated Transcriptional Regulation of hPPAR via a DR1 Element
A, HNF4 increases hPPAR promoter activity. HepG2 cells were transfected with the indicated reporter construct in the presence or absence of increasing amounts (3, 10, and 30 ng) of the HNF4 expression plasmid. When the hPPAR promoter plasmid was not cotransfected, pGL3 basic empty vector was added to the transfection mixture. Relative luciferase activities are shown as described in Fig. 4. B, Deletion analysis of the hPPAR promoter. HepG2 cells were transfected with the indicated reporter constructs in the presence or absence of 30 ng of HNF4 expression plasmid. Relative luciferase activities in the presence of HNF4 are shown as fold induction of the activity of the reporter constructs in the absence of HNF4. C, Schematic representation of the constructs p(H-H)-pGL3 and p(H-H)HNF4-REmut-pGL3. The bases mutated in p(H-H)HNF4-REmut-pGL3 are underlined. D, Localization of a functional HNF4-RE in the hPPAR promoter. HepG2 and Cos cells were transfected with the indicated reporter constructs in the presence or absence of the HNF4 expression plasmid (50 ng). Relative luciferase activities are shown as fold induction of the activity of the p(H-H)-pGL3 reporter construct in the absence of HNF4. The data presented in panels A, B, and D represent the mean  plus or minus  SD of the firefly luciferase activity normalized relative to a Renilla luciferase transfection internal control.
  Binding Analysis of HNF4 to the DR1 Element To demonstrate direct binding of HNF4 to the HNF4-RE, EMSAs were performed with a radiolabeled DR1 oligonucleotide probe and in vitro translated HNF4 proteins. As shown in Fig. 6, HNF4 bound the HNF4-RE (Fig. 6A, lane 4) and the well characterized C3P site present in the apo CIII promoter (39) with similar efficacy (Fig. 6A, lanes 2 and 4). DNA binding was almost completely abolished when two-point mutations were introduced into the HNF4-RE-labeled oligonucleotide (GCAGCAAAGTTCA instead of GGGGCAAAGTTCA where the underlined letters indicate the mutated nucleotides) (Fig. 6A, lane 5). Furthermore, the specificity of the HNF4-DR1 interaction was demonstrated by competition studies. Inhibition of formation of the complex was shown by the addition of increasing concentrations of either the unlabeled HNF4-RE (Fig. 6B, lanes 3 to 5) or C3P (Fig. 6B, lanes 9 to 11) oligonucleotides, whereas competition with an equivalent amount of unlabeled mutated HNF4-RE did not significantly displace the labeled wild-type element (Fig. 6B, lanes 6 to 8).
View larger version (69K):    Figure 6. HNF4 Binds the HNF4-RE
A, HNF4 binds the HNF4-RE and C3P oligonucleotide probes with similar efficacy. Autoradiograph of EMSA performed on end-labeled oligonucleotides (probe) using in vitro translated HNF4. B, Competition experiments were performed in the presence of 1-, 10-, and 100-fold molar excess of the indicated unlabeled oligonucleotides on a HNF4-RE radiolabeled probe.
  The HNF4-RE Confers HNF4 Responsiveness to a Heterologous Promoter To explore the activation of the HNF4-RE by HNF4 in the context of a heterologous promoter, cotransfection studies were performed with the HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 construct, which contains two copies of the DR1 in the sense orientation in front of the thymidine kinase (TK) promoter (Fig. 7A). Upon cotransfection of HNF4 into both HepG2 and RK13 cells, the HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 transcriptional activity was significantly enhanced (Fig. 7, B and C). By contrast, the reporter activity of a similar heterologous promoter construct containing two copies of the mutated HNF4-RE was not influenced by HNF4 cotransfection (Fig. 7C). Taken together, these data show that the DR1 site is a bona fide HNF4-RE that mediates HNF4 induction of hPPAR promoter activity.
View larger version (17K):    Figure 7. The HNF4-RE Confers HNF4 Responsiveness to a Heterologous Promoter
A, Schematic representation of the HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 and the HNF4-REmutx2S-TKpGL3 constructs. The bases mutated in HNF4-REmutx2S-TKpGL3 are underlined. B, The HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 construct was transfected in either HepG2 or RK13 cells in the presence or absence of HNF4. When the HNF4-RE heterologous construct was not cotransfected, TK-pGL3 empty vector was added to the transfection mixture (-). Data represent the mean  plus or minus  SD of the firefly luciferase activity normalized relative to a Renilla luciferase transfection internal control. Relative luciferase activities are shown as fold induction of the activity of TK-pGL3 in the absence of HNF4, which was arbitrarily set to 1. C, HepG2 cells were transfected with either the HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 or the HNF4-REmutx2S-TKpGL3 constructs in the presence or absence of HNF4. The data represent the mean  plus or minus  SD of the firefly luciferase activity normalized relative to a Renilla luciferase transfection internal control and are shown as described in Fig. 5B.
  COUP-TFII Binds the HNF4-RE and Represses Basal and HNF4-Induced hPPAR Promoter Activity DR1 elements can be recognized not only by HNF4, but also by other members of the nuclear receptor superfamily, including the transcription factor COUP-TFII, also known as apo A-1 regulatory protein 1 or ARP1 (40). In addition, COUP-TFII has been shown to actively repress or modulate the effects of HNF4 on the transcription of several genes in liver (39, 41, 42, 43, 44). Therefore, the ability of COUP-TFII to bind the HNF4-RE was evaluated by gel shift analysis. COUP-TFII proteins bound to the radiolabeled HNF4-RE probe, and competition with 50-fold molar excess of unlabeled HNF4-RE oligonucleotide completely inhibited the formation of the COUP-TFII -DNA complex (Fig. 8A, lanes 2 and 3).
View larger version (29K):    Figure 8. COUP-TFII Binds the DR1 and Modulates Basal and HNF4-Induced hPPAR Promoter Activity
A, EMSA performed on end-labeled HNF4-RE oligonucleotide in the presence of in vitro translated COUP-TFII. The unlabeled oligonucleotide (50-fold molar excess) was added to the binding reactions when indicated. B, The indicated reporter constructs were cotransfected into either HepG2 or Cos cells with or without HNF4 and COUP-TFII as indicated. When either the HNF4 or COUP-TFII expression plasmids were not cotransfected, pSG5 or pCDNA3 empty vectors, respectively, were added to the transfection mixture. Relative luciferase activities (mean  plus or minus  SD) are shown as fold induction of the activity of the p(H-H)-pGL3 reporter construct in the absence of both HNF4 and COUP-TFII.
  The influence of COUP-TFII on the hPPAR promoter activity was then investigated by cotransfection experiments in HepG2 and Cos cells. Transient transfection of COUP-TFII alone decreased the activity of the hPPAR promoter construct containing the HNF4-RE site in both HepG2 and Cos cells (Fig. 8B). As previously observed, upon cotransfection of HNF4, hPPAR promoter activity was induced in both cell lines. However, overexpression of COUP-TFII in the presence of HNF4 abrogated the HNF4-induced transcriptional activity. On the contrary, when identical experiments were performed with a promoter construct bearing a mutation in the HNF4-RE, promoter activity was not affected by cotransfection of either COUP-TFII or HNF4 alone or added together (Fig. 8B). These data demonstrate that the repression of the PPAR promoter by COUP-TFII and the antagonism of the HNF4 induction are dependent on the HNF4-RE. Altogether these results indicate that COUP-TFII negatively regulates PPAR gene transcription.
hPPAR Binds the HNF4-RE and Regulates Its Own Expression Next, direct binding of PPAR/RXR heterodimers to the hPPAR HNF4-RE was examined. To this purpose, gel shift analysis was performed with the radiolabeled HNF4-RE probe and in vitro translated PPAR and RXR proteins. PPAR/RXR heterodimers bound the HNF4-RE oligonucleotide (Fig. 9A, lane 2). DNA binding could be competed with increasing amounts of unlabeled HNF4-RE oligonucleotide (Fig. 9A, lanes 3 to 5), whereas incubation with a mutated HNF4-RE oligonucleotide did not compete for binding (Fig. 9A, lanes 6 to 8).
View larger version (28K):    Figure 9. PPAR Positively Regulates Its Own Expression
A, PPAR binds the HNF4-RE. EMSA performed on end-labeled HNF4-RE oligonucleotide in the presence of in vitro translated PPAR and RXR. Competition experiments were performed in the presence of 10-, 25-, and 50-fold molar excess of the indicated unlabeled oligonucleotides. B, PPAR modulates hPPAR promoter activity via the HNF4-RE. Cos cells were transfected with either the p(H-H)-pGL3 hPPAR or the p(H-H) HNF4-REmut-pGL3 hPPAR promoter construct, with or without a PPAR expression plasmid in the presence or absence of 100  microM Wy 14,643 as indicated. Relative luciferase activities (mean  plus or minus  SD) for each construct are shown relative to the promoter activity in the absence of PPAR and activator, which was arbitrarily set to 1. C, The HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 plasmid was transfected in Cos cells with or without PPAR in the presence or absence of 50  microM Wy 14,643 as indicated. Relative luciferase activities (mean  plus or minus  SD) are shown as in panel B. D, Fenofibric acid enhances hPPAR mRNA levels in primary cultures of human hepatocytes. Human hepatocytes were isolated and treated for 24 h with (FF) or without (CON) 250  microM fenofibric acid. One microgram of total RNA was reversed transcribed and subjected to Real Time PCR analysis as described in Materials and Methods. Specific hPPAR mRNA normalized to 28S content is expressed relative to untreated cells (mean  plus or minus  SD, n = 3).
  To determine the effect of PPAR on hPPAR promoter activity, transient transfection assays were performed using the hPPAR promoter construct containing the HNF4-RE. Cotransfection of PPAR induced hPPAR reporter activity approximately 2-fold, an effect that was enhanced in the presence of Wy 14,643. By contrast, no effect by either PPAR or its ligand could be observed when a construct containing the mutated HNF4-RE was employed, indicating that an intact HNF4-RE site is required for the PPAR-mediated induction. To investigate whether the HNF4-RE could function as a PPRE in front of a heterologous promoter, transient transfection assays were performed using the HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 construct (Fig. 9C). Incubation of cells with Wy 14,643 in the presence of cotransfected PPAR resulted in a 5-fold activation of the HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 construct, indicating that the HNF4-RE site is a functional PPRE.
Finally, to analyze whether hPPAR mRNA expression is regulated by PPAR agonists, primary hepatocytes isolated from human liver were cultured for 24 h in medium containing fenofibric acid. hPPAR mRNA levels were markedly up-regulated upon treatment with fenofibric acid (Fig. 9D). Taken together, these data show that PPAR positively autoregulates its expression.
   DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   PPAR is a transcription factor that regulates lipid, glucose, and energy homeostasis and controls body weight and vascular inflammation. Thus, PPAR may play a modulatory role in the onset and evolution of different metabolic and vascular disorders such as dyslipidemia, obesity, insulin resistance, and atherosclerosis (1). Dysregulation of PPAR expression may contribute to the development of these disorders as well as the response to its fibrate agonists. Indeed, PPAR expression levels have been shown to influence its transcriptional activity as well as the response to fibrate treatment in rodents (22, 25, 26, 27). However, the study of the molecular mechanisms governing PPAR regulation in humans has not been addressed to date.
To study PPAR regulation in humans, we characterized the 5'-flanking region of the hPPAR gene and identified the hPPAR promoter. The genomic organization of hPPAR was recently reported (34, 35). The hPPAR gene contains at least eight exons in which exons 1 and 2, the 5'-end of exon 3, and the 3'-end of exon 8 are not translated (34, 35). As an initial step in our study, the 5'-UTR of the hPPAR gene was further characterized, resulting in the completion of the 5'-end sequence of exon 1, renamed exon 1a, and in the identification of an alternatively spliced 5'-variant. An alternatively spliced exon in the mouse PPAR 5'-UTR has been previously reported (36). However, alignment of both mouse and human 5'-UTR sequences revealed no significant degree of homology between them despite the coding exons being very similar between species.
The transcription start site of the hPPAR gene was mapped. The proximal promoter of the hPPAR gene contains no typical TATA or CCAAT boxes and has a high GC content, including several consensus Sp1 sites, features that are also present in the mouse PPAR promoter (36). Excluding the proximal GC-rich region, both promoters do not show a high degree in sequence homology (40%). However, only a small fragment of the mouse PPAR promoter has been sequenced to date (36). This sequence disparity in both the 5'-UTR and the promoter regions may indicate that PPAR gene expression among species could be regulated in a different manner although sufficient data to establish a thorough comparison between species are lacking at this stage.
Computer-assisted analysis of the hPPAR promoter sequence identified various putative transcription factor binding sites, such as sites for members of the early growth response (Egr) gene family, which are involved in the induction of monocytic differentiation (45). Egr proteins could thus be involved in the up-regulation of hPPAR expression upon monocyte differentiation into macrophages (32) although further studies are needed to confirm this hypothesis. Furthermore, potential sites for NFB and AP1, factors involved in the transduction of several cytokine and proinflammatory signals, as well as for the myeloid zinc finger gene, MZF-1, were found in the hPPAR promoter. PPAR inhibition of NFB- and AP1-induced expression of inflammatory response genes (46) lies at the basis of its antiinflammatory activities. It is tempting to speculate that hPPAR expression, in its turn, is controlled by inflammatory cytokines. Because rodent PPAR mRNA levels are increased by glucocorticoids (20, 21), putative GR response elements were searched for. No obvious GR response element could be detected within the hPPAR regulatory region analyzed; however, regulation studies in human tissues or cell lines would be necessary to determine whether hPPAR expression is also modulated by glucocorticoids in humans.
HNF4 is a nuclear receptor that plays a key role in liver-specific gene expression (47) and is required for mammalian hepatocyte differentiation and for normal metabolic regulation in liver (48). HNF4 is expressed at high levels in liver, kidney, and intestine (47). It binds as homodimers to DR1-like response elements, thereby modulating the expression of several liver-enriched genes encoding apolipoproteins, coagulation factors, serum proteins, proteins of the cytochrome P450 family, and genes involved in FA and glucose metabolism (49). Regulation of hPPAR by HNF4 is consistent with the tissue-expression pattern shown by PPAR. In the present study induction of hPPAR promoter activity by HNF4 is reported. A HNF4-RE was identified at nt -1,492 to -1,483 within the hPPAR promoter. This element closely resembles several HNF4-REs found in other genes and the GGGGCA A AGGTCA consensus HNF4 binding site (50). Moreover, the regulation of PPAR gene expression by HNF4 in vivo in mice was recently demonstrated using HNF4-deficient mice (51). These mice display significantly lower PPAR mRNA levels compared with the wild-type mice, thus demonstrating that PPAR expression is regulated by HNF4 also in mice. Nevertheless, the promoter experiments performed with the hPPAR promoter indicate that the HNF4 site identified is not responsible for the activity of the hPPAR promoter in liver because the promoter construct lacking this site still possesses a significant activity in HepG2 cells (Fig. 4). This may suggest that this site binds as well other factors, such as COUP-TF, present in these cells that negatively regulate the hPPAR promoter either as a result of a direct repression of the promoter or due to competition with factors, such as HNF4, for binding to the site. In addition, negative factors may bind to sites located between -1,664 and -1,206 bp in the hPPAR promoter. Future studies on the regulation of this promoter will be required to elucidate the factors governing hPPAR gene expression in liver.
Members of the COUP-TF family of orphan nuclear receptors have been reported to bind DR1 sites that are also recognized by HNF4 (52). COUP-TF actively represses or antagonizes HNF4-mediated transcriptional activation of several genes (39, 41, 42, 43, 44). COUP-TF II has been shown to play a role in cardiac energy metabolism and heart development (53, 54). In this study, COUP-TFII was also shown to bind the HNF4-RE within the hPPAR regulatory region and to repress both basal and HNF4-induced hPPAR promoter activity. The COUP-TFII antagonism may finely tune HNF4-dependent gene expression. The expression level of a COUP-TFII/HNF4 target gene would therefore depend on the relative concentrations of both transcription factors in a given cell type or during a certain condition. For instance, the age-dependent diminution of apo AI gene expression has been shown to occur at the transcriptional level and to be associated with a decrease in the binding capacity and expression of HNF4 and a parallel increase in COUP-TFII binding and concentration levels (55). Interestingly, PPAR gene expression is also diminished in aged rats (23). Further studies are required to demonstrate whether the molecular mechanisms described for the age-dependent decline of apo AI can also explain the decreased expression of PPAR with age.
Finally, PPAR is also capable of binding to the HNF4-RE. Induction of PPAR gene expression by PPAR agonists has been reported in different rodent cell lines (22, 24, 56). Our data indicate that PPAR agonists, such as fenofibrate, induce hPPAR mRNA levels in primary cultures of human hepatocytes as well as hPPAR promoter activity, suggesting that these effects are exerted at the transcriptional level. Furthermore, induction of hPPAR promoter activity is dependent on the identified HNF4-RE. Autoregulation is a common feature among nuclear receptors. For instance, GRs are regulated by glucocorticoids, and glucocorticoids exert these actions mainly at the level of transcription (57). AR is another nuclear receptor that is autoregulated (58), and three different ER promoters have been shown to be regulated by estrogens (59).
The coding exons of the hPPAR gene have been screened for polymorphisms. A leucine-to-valine missense mutation at codon 162 in exon 5 of the hPPAR gene (L162V) was recently identified (34, 35). This polymorphism shows an enhanced transactivation activity (34) and has been associated with altered plasma lipid and lipoprotein concentrations in type 2 diabetic subjects (34), supporting a role for PPAR in dyslipidemia and diabetes in humans also. Variants have been identified in other exons and introns of the hPPAR gene (Ref. 60 and Flavell, D., I. Pineda Torra, and B. Staels, unpublished observations). However, these polymorphisms either show low frequency in the populations studied or they do not directly affect PPAR activity due to their location in intronic sequences of the gene. Thus, it will be interesting to search for polymorphisms in the promoter sequences of the gene that may affect PPAR expression and function.
Taken together, the 5'-flanking region of the hPPAR gene has been characterized, cloned, and functionally studied. HNF4 induces hPPAR expression via a DR1 element present in the hPPAR promoter, whereas this effect is antagonized by the orphan receptor COUP-TFII. In addition, PPAR itself modulates its own expression. Knowledge of the hPPAR promoter structure will allow further studies of the molecular mechanisms governing hPPAR gene regulation.
   MATERIALS AND METHODS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   DNA Sequencing Sequencing of a BAC clone containing the hPPAR gene (kind gift of B.Wilkinson; Glaxo Welcome, Research Triangle Park, NC) was performed using the dRhodamine terminator cycle sequencing kit on an ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer (Perkin-Elmer Corp., La Jolla, CA).
Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends (5'-RACE) PCR and RT-PCR Analysis Total human liver RNA was isolated using the guanidinium isothiocyanate method (61). 5'-RACE was performed on 1  microg total RNA using the 5' RACE-System for Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends kit (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturer s instructions. For the determination of the 5'-end of exon 1a, first-strand synthesis of hPPAR cDNA was carried out using the IP7 oligonucleotide (5'-CAAGCAGTCCTCCTACCTCAGCCTTCCAAG-3') located in exon 1b (Fig. 1C) as a gene-specific primer. After RNase H treatment and poly(dC)-tailing of the cDNA with a terminal deoxynucleotide transferase, the resulting cDNA (5  microl) was amplified in a PCR using the Abridged Anchor Primer (AAP) and the internal gene-specific primer YGSP1 (5'-AGTTCTGAGCTTCTCTTGCCACAAACAGTTGAGTCC-3') located in exon 1a (Fig. 2D). PCR cycling parameters were as follows: initial denaturation at 95 C for 5 min followed by 35 cycles of 1 min at 95 C, 40 sec at 57 C, and 40 sec at 72 C with a final elongation at 72 C for 3 min. The PCR product was then diluted 100-fold, and the diluted PCR (5  microl) was used for a nested PCR under the same conditions described above with the Abridged Universal Amplification Primer (AUAP) (nested to AAP) and oligonucleotide IP18 (5'-AGAGTCGCTGCGGTCCCCAGAC-3') (nested to YGSP1). Oligonucleotides AUAP and AAP were provided in the 5'-RACE kit. PCR products were visualized on a 2% agarose gel and sequenced as described above. RT-PCR amplification of the hPPAR 5'-UTR was performed as described (31) using oligonucleotides 15C (5'-CAGGGCCCTGTCTGCTCTGTGCA-3'), 13 (5'-CTCTTATCTATGAAGCAGGAAGCACG-3'), and IP3.
RNase Protection Analysis The RNase protection probe used to map the transcription initiation site of the hPPAR gene was amplified by PCR from the BAC-hPPAR clone using oligonucleotides IP24 (5'-CGCGGGGCCCGGGGTCTCGGGGTCTCCG-3') and IP18 and cloned into the EcoRV site of pBluescript SK+ (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). After linearizing with XhoI, antisense RNA was transcribed with T3 polymerase using the Maxiscript Kit (Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX) as described by the manufacturer. This 337-nucleotide probe contains cRNA complementary to the hPPAR 5'-flanking region (bp -22 to +213) and to the polylinker of the pBluescript SK+ vector (102 bp). RNase protection analysis was carried out using the Hybspeed RNase protection Kit (Ambion, Inc.) as described previously (31).
Real-Time PCR mRNA Quantification PPAR and 28S mRNAs were quantified by reverse transcription followed by Real-Time PCR using a LightCycler (Roche Diagnostics, Meylan, France) with oligonucleotide primers specific for hPPAR (5'-ATATCTCCCTTTTTGTGGCTGCTA-3' and 5'-TCCGACTCCGTCTTCTYGATGA-3') and 28S (62). Reactions were carried out in a 20- microl reaction containing a 500-nM concentration of each primer, 4 mM MgCl2, and the LightCycler-FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green I mix as recommended by the manufacturer with the following conditions: 95 C for 8 min, followed by 40 cycles of 10 sec at 95 C, 10 sec at 55 C and 14 sec (for hPPAR) or 15 sec (for 28S) at 72 C. hPPAR mRNA levels were normalized to 28S mRNA.
Cloning of the hPPAR Promoter and Construction of Reporter Plasmids Genomic sequences between -3,593 and +83 (numbered on the basis of the distance from the transcription initiation site) obtained by direct sequencing of the BAC-hPPAR clone were amplified by PCR using oligonucleotides IP34 (5'-GCCAGGAGCAGCCACCAGGGAAATC-3') and 5-GSP (5'-AGTCCTCGGTGTGTGTCCTCGCTCCTC-3') from BAC clone DNA. The resulting product was cloned blunt into the EcoRV site of pBluescript SK+ (Stratagene). Reporter constructs were generated thereafter by digestion using restriction sites within the hPPAR promoter. The pBS(IP34 to 5GSP) construct was digested with HindIII or both HindIII and XhoI, and the resulting promoter digestion products were gel purified and cloned into a HindIII or XhoI plus HindIII-digested pGL3 basic plasmid (Promega Corp., Madison, WI), creating the reporter vectors p(H-H)-pGL3 and p(X-H)-pGL3, respectively. Plasmids p(E-H)-pGL3 and p(P-H)-pGL3 were generated by digestion of p(X-H)-pGL3 with EcoRI plus XhoI or PstI plus XhoI, Klenow fill in of cohesive ends, and subsequent ligation of the obtained blunt ends. HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 and HNF4-REmutx2S-TKpGL3 were created by ligating two copies of the corresponding double-stranded oligonucleotides (5'-GATCCTGGAGGGTGGGGCAAAGTTCACCATAGGTA-3' for HNF4-REx2S-TKpGL3 and 5'-GATCCTGGAGGGTGCAGCAAAGTTCACCATAGGTA-3' for HNF4-REmutx2S-TKpGL3) in the sense orientation into the BamHI site of TK-pGL3. All constructs were verified by restriction site digestion and sequence analysis. Transcription factor analysis of the promoter was performed using the MatInspector program (http://genomatix.gsf.de/cgi-bin/matinspector/matinspector.pl).
Site-Directed Mutagenesis To create p(H-H)HNF4-REmut-pGL3, mutation of the HNF4-RE was generated using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) and oligonucleotide (5'-GGTGTCTGGAGGCTGCAGCAAAGTTCACCATAG-3') and its complementary oligonucleotide according to the manufacturer s recommendations.
Cell Culture and Transient Transfection Assays Human liver specimens were collected for transplantation at the Moscow Center, and hepatocytes were obtained by a two-step collagenase perfusion as previously described (63). Donors were physically healthy subjects who died after traumatic brain injury. Permission to use the remaining untransplanted donor liver for scientific research purposes was obtained from the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation. After 20 h of culture the medium was discarded and 250  microM fenofibric acid (Laboratories Fournier, Daix, France) or vehicle was added at the indicated concentration in serum-free medium for 24 h. HepG2 (human hepatoblastoma), RK13 (rabbit kidney), and Cos cells were cultured as previously described (31). HepG2 (105), RK13 (8 x 104), and Cos (4 x 104) cells were transfected using the cationic lipid RPR 120535B (kind gift of Aventis, Vitry, France) as described previously (64). One hundred nanograms of the indicated pGL3 basic firefly luciferase reporter constructs or 10 ng of the TK-pGL3 reporters were cotransfected with or without 30 to 50 ng of pSG5-hHNF41 (termed HNF4 throughout this manuscript, kindly provided by B. Laine), pcDNA3-COUP-TFII [subcloned from pMT2-COUP-TFII (65) into pcDNA3] or pSG5-hPPAR, and either 20 ng or 5 ng of the internal control Renilla luciferase reporter plasmids, pRL-Null (when basal promoter activities of the different deletion constructs were examined) (Promega Corp.) and pRL-C+ (for the remaining transfection experiments), respectively. pRL-C+ was obtained by replacing the luc + cassette in pGL3-C+ (Promega Corp.) with the Renilla gene. When either HNF4 or COUP-TFII plasmid was not cotransfected, pSG5 (Stratagene) or pcDNA3 (Invitrogen) empty vectors were added to the transfection mixture. Luciferase activity was assayed 36 h later using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega Corp.). Transfections were carried out in triplicate, and each experiment was repeated at least twice.
EMSAs HNF4, COUP-TFII, PPAR, and RXR were synthesized in vitro using the TNT Quick Coupled Transcription/Translation System (Promega Corp.). Double-stranded oligonucleotides were end-labeled with [-32P]ATP by using T4-polynucleotide kinase. Proteins (2  microl) were incubated for 15 min at room temperature in a total volume of 20  microl with 2.5  microg poly (dI-dC) and 1  microg herring sperm DNA in binding buffer (10 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.8; 100 mM NaCl; 0.1 mM EDTA; 10% glycerol; 1 mg/ml BSA; and 0.5 mM dithiothreitol) before the radiolabeled probe (0.5 ng) was added. Binding reactions were further incubated for 15 min and resolved by 4% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in 0.25x Tris-borate-EDTA buffer at room temperature. For competition experiments, increasing amounts of unlabeled oligonucleotide HNF4-RE, HNF4-REmut, or C3P (39) were included in the binding reaction just before addition of the labeled oligonucleotide.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   We thank Christian Duhem, Odile Vidal, and Eric Raspe for their expert technical assistance. We are grateful to Lluis Fajas, Raphael Darteil, and Olivier Barbier for their helpful advice and discussions.
   FOOTNOTES   This work was supported by European Community Grant ERBFMBICT983214 (to I.P.T.) and BIOMED 2 Grant PL963324 (to Y.J. and B.S.). Y.J. is also supported by British Heart Foundation Grant FS/98058.
Abbreviations: AP1 or 2, Activating protein 1 or 2; AAP, abridged anchor primer; BAC, bacterial chromosomal clone, COUP-TFII, chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II; DR1, direct repeat-1, FA, fatty acid; HNF4, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4; HNF4-RE, HNF4 regulatory element; NFB, nuclear factor B; PPRE, PPAR response element; RACE, rapid amplification of cDNA ends; RNase, ribonuclease; TK, thymidine kinase; UTR, untranslated region.
1 The sequence data for the hPPAR exon 1a, 1b, and promoter have been submitted to the GenBank database under GenBank accession numbers AF323915, AF323916, and AF323917, respectively.
Received for publication August 31, 2001. Accepted for publication January 17, 2001.
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION RESULTS DISCUSSION MATERIALS AND METHODS REFERENCES   Desvergne B, Wahli W 1999 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors: nuclear control of metabolism. Endocr Rev 20:649 to 688[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chinetti G, Fruchart JC, Staels B 2000 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs): nuclear receptors at the crossroads between lipid metabolism and inflammation. Inflamm Res 49:497 to 505[CrossRef][Medline] Willson TM, Brown PJ, Sternbach DD, Henke BR 2000 The PPARs: from orphan receptors to drug discovery. J Med Chem 43:527 to 550[CrossRef][Medline] Staels B, Dallongeville J, Auwerx J, Schoonjans K, Leitersdorf E, Fruchart J-C 1998 Mechanism of action of fibrates on lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. Circulation 98:2088 to 2093[Abstract/Free Full Text] Guerre-Millo M, Gervois P, Raspe E, Madsen L, Poulain P, Derudas B, Herbert JM, Winegar DA, Willson TM, Fruchart JC, Berge RK, Staels B 2000 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor activators improve insulin sensitivity and reduce adiposity. J Biol Chem 275:16638 to 16642[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ye JM, Doyle PJ, Iglesias MA, Watson DG, Cooney GJ, Kraegen EW 2001 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)- activation lowers muscle lipids and improves insulin sensitivity in high fat-fed rats: comparison with PPAR- activation. Diabetes 50:411 to 417[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chinetti G, Gbaguidi FG, Griglio S, Mallat Z, Antonucci M, Poulain P, Chapman J, Fruchart JC, Tedgui A, Najib-Fruchart J, Staels B 2000 CLA-1/SR-BI is expressed in atherosclerotic lesion macrophages and regulated by activators of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors. Circulation 101:2411 to 2417[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chinetti G, Lestavel S, Bocher V, Remaley AT, Neve B, Pineda Torra I, Teissier E, Minnich A, Jaye M, Duverger N, Brewer HB, Fruchart JC, Clavey V, Staels B 2001 PPAR- and PPAR- activators induce cholesterol removal from human macrophage foam cells through stimulation of the ABCA1 pathway. Nat Med 7:53 to 58[CrossRef][Medline] Staels B, Koenig W, Habib A, Merval R, Lebret M, Pineda Torra I, Delerive P, Fadel A, Chinetti G, Fruchart J-C, Najib J, Maclouf J, Tedgui A 1998 Activation of human aortic smooth-muscle cells is inhibited by PPAR but not by PPAR activators. Nature 393:790 to 793[CrossRef][Medline] Madej A, Okopien B, Kowalski J, Zielinski M, Wysichi J, Szygula B, Kalina Z, Herman ZS 1998 Effects of fenofibrate on plasma cytokine concentrations in patients with atherosclerosis and hyperlipoproteinemia IIb. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 36:345 to 349[Medline] Ericsson CG, Hamsten A, Nilsson J, Grip L, Svane B, Defaire U 1996 Angiographic assessment of effects of bezafibrate on progression of coronary artery disease in young male postinfarction patients. Lancet 347:849 to 853[Medline] Frick MH, Syvanne M, Nieminen MS, Kauma H, Majahalme S, Virtanen V, Kesaniemi YA, Pasternak A, Taskinen MR 1997 Prevention of the angiographic progression of coronary and vein-graft atherosclerosis by gemfibrozil after coronary bypass surgery in men with low levels of HDL cholesterol. Circulation 96:2137 to 2143[Abstract/Free Full Text] Rubins HB, Robins SJ, Collins D, Fye CL, Anderson JW, Elam MB, Faas FH, Linares E, Schaefer EJ, Schectman G, Wilt TJ, Wittes J 1999 Gemfibrozil for the secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in men with low levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. Veterans Affairs High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol Intervention Trial Study Group. N Engl J Med 341:410 to 418[Abstract/Free Full Text] Steiner G, Hamsten A, Hosking A, Stewart J, McLaugdstone P, Sole M, Syvanne M 2001 Effect of fenofibrate on progression of coronary-artery disease in type 2 diabetes: the Diabetes Atherosclerosis Intervention Study, a randomised study. Lancet 357:905 to 910[CrossRef][Medline] Braissant O, Foufelle F, Scotto C, Dauca M, Wahli W 1996 Differential expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs): tissue distribution of PPAR-, -ss, and - in the adult rat. Endocrinology 137:354 to 366[Abstract] Auboeuf D, Rieusset J, Fajas L, Vallier P, Frering V, Riou JP, Staels B, Auwerx J, Laville M, Vidal H 1997 Tissue distribution and quantification of the expression of mRNAs of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and liver X receptor- in humans: no alteration in adipose tissue of obese and NIDDM patients. Diabetes 46:1319 to 1327[Abstract] Mukherjee R, Jow L, Noonan D, McDonnell DP 1994 Human and rat peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPARs) demonstrate similar tissue distribution but different responsiveness to PPAR activators. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 51:157 to 166[CrossRef][Medline] Lemberger T, Saladin R, Vazquez M, Assimacopoulos F, Staels B, Desvergne B, Wahli W, Auwerx J 1996 Expression of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gene is stimulated by stress and follows a diurnal rhythm. J Biol Chem 271:1764 to 1769[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yamada J, Sugiyama H, Watanabe T, Suga T 1995 Suppressive effect of growth hormone on the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor in cultured rat hepatocytes. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol 90:173 to 176[Medline] Steineger HH, Sorensen HN, Tugwood JD, Skrede S, Spydevold O, Gautvik KM 1994 Dexamethasone and insulin demonstrate marked and opposite regulation of the steady-state mRNA level of the peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) in hepatic cells. Hormonal modulation of fatty-acid-induced transcription. Eur J Biochem 225:967 to 974[Abstract] Lemberger T, Staels B, Saladin R, Desvergne B, Auwerx J, Wahli W 1994 Regulation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gene by glucocorticoids. J Biol Chem 269:24527 to 24530[Abstract/Free Full Text] Zhou YT, Shimabukuro M, Wang MY, Lee Y, Higa M, Milburn JL, Newgard CB, Unger RH 1998 Role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor in disease of pancreatic ss cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:8898 to 8903[Abstract/Free Full Text] Poynter ME, Daynes DA 1998 PPAR activation modulates cellular redox status, represses NFB signalling and reduces inflammatory cytokine production in aging. J Biol Chem 273:32833 to 32841[Abstract/Free Full Text] Valmaseda A, Carmona MC, Barbera MJ, Vinas O, Mampel T, Iglesias R, Villarroya F, Giralt M 1999 Opposite regulation of PPAR- and - gene expression by both their ligands and retinoic acid in brown adipocytes. Mol Cell Endocrinol 154:101 to 109[CrossRef][Medline] Kersten S, Seydoux J, Peters JM, Gonzalez FJ, Desvergne B, Wahli W 1999 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor mediates the adaptive response to fasting. J Clin Invest 103:1489 to 1498[Abstract/Free Full Text] Barger PM, Brandt JM, Leone TC, Weinheimer CJ, Kelly DP 2000 Deactivation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- during cardiac hypertrophic growth. J Clin Invest 105:1723 to 1730[Abstract/Free Full Text] Beigneux AP, Moser AH, Shigenaga JK, Grunfeld C, Feingold KR 2000 The acute phase response is associated with retinoid X receptor repression in rodent liver. J Biol Chem 275:16390 to 16399[Abstract/Free Full Text] Narravula S, Colgan SP 2001 Hypoxia-inducible factor 1-mediated inhibition of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor expression during hypoxia. J Immunol 166:7543 to 7548[Abstract/Free Full Text] Duez HM, Poulain P, Fievet C, Fruchart J-C, Staels B 2000 Peroxisome proliferator activated-receptor (PPAR) is required for the in vivo regulation of apo A-I gene expression by fibrates. Circulation 102:II-47 Palmer CN, Hsu MH, Griffin KJ, Raucy JL, Johnson EF 1998 Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor- expression in human liver. Mol Pharmacol 53:14 to 22[Abstract/Free Full Text] Gervois P, Pineda Torra I, Chinetti G, Grotzinger T, Dubois G, Fruchart JC, Fruchart-Najib J, Leitersdorf E, Staels B 1999 A truncated human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor splice variant with dominant negative activity. Mol Endocrinol 13:1535 to 1549[Abstract/Free Full Text] Chinetti G, Griglio S, Antonucci M, Pineda Torra I, Delerive P, Majd Z, Fruchart J-C, Chapman J, Najib J, Staels B 1998 Activation of proliferator-activated receptors and induces apoptosis of human monocyte-derived macrophages. J Biol Chem 273:25573 to 25581[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sartippour MR, Renier G 2000 Differential regulation of macrophage peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor expression by glucose: role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors in lipoprotein lipase gene expression. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 20:104 to 110[Abstract/Free Full Text] Flavell DM, Pineda Torra I, Jamshidi Y, Evans D, Diamond JR, Elkeles RS, Bujac SR, Miller G, Talmud PJ, Staels B, Humphries SE 2000 Variation in the PPAR gene is associated with altered function in vitro and plasma lipid concentrations in type II diabetic subjects. Diabetologia 43:673 to 680[CrossRef][Medline] Vohl MC, Lepage P, Gaudet D, Brewer CG, Betard C, Perron P, Houde G, Cellier C, Faith JM, Despres JP, Morgan K, Hudson TJ 2000 Molecular scanning of the human PPARalpha gene: association of the L162V mutation with hyperapobetalipoproteinemia. J Lipid Res 41:945 to 952[Abstract/Free Full Text] Gearing KL, Crickmore A, Gustafsson JA 1994 Structure of the mouse peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gene. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 199:255 to 263[CrossRef][Medline] Sher T, Yi HF, McBride OW, Gonzalez FJ 1993 cDNA cloning, chromosomal mapping, and functional characterization of the human peroxisome proliferator activated receptor. Biochemistry 32:5598 to 5604[Medline] Quandt K, Frech K, Karas H, Wingender E, Werner T 1995 MatInd and MatInspector: new fast and versatile tools for detection of consensus matches in nucleotide sequence data. Nucleic Acids Res 23:4878 to 4884[Abstract] Mietus-Snyder M, Sladek FM, Ginsburg GS, Kuo CF, Ladias JA, Darnell JE, Jr., Karathanasis SK 1992 Antagonism between apolipoprotein AI regulatory protein 1, Ear3/COUP-TF, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 modulates apolipoprotein CIII gene expression in liver and intestinal cells. Mol Cell Biol 12:1708 to 1718[Abstract] Ladias JA, Karathanasis SK 1991 Regulation of the apolipoprotein AI gene by ARP-1, a novel member of the steroid receptor superfamily. Science 251:561 to 565[Medline] Cairns W, Smith CAD, McLaren AW, Wolf CR 1996 Characterization of the human cytochrome P4502D6 promoter. A potential role for antagonistic interactions between members of the nuclear receptor family. J Biol Chem 271:25269 to 25276[Abstract/Free Full Text] Galson DL, Tsuchiya T, Tendler DS, Huang LE, Ren Y, Ogura T, Bunn HF 1995 The orphan receptor hepatic nuclear factor 4 functions as a transcriptional activator for tissue-specific and hypoxia-specific erythropoietin gene expression and is antagonized by EAR3/COUP-TF1. Mol Cell Biol 15:2135 to 2144[Abstract] Ladias JA, Hadzopoulou-Cladaras M, Kardassis D, Cardot P, Cheng J, Zannis V, Cladaras C 1992 Transcriptional regulation of human apolipoprotein genes ApoB, ApoCIII, and ApoAII by members of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily HNF-4, ARP-1, EAR-2, and EAR-3. J Biol Chem 267:15849 to 15860[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kimura A, Nishiyori A, Murakami T, Tsukamoto T, Hata S, Osumi T, Okamura R, Mori M, Takiguchi M 1993 Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor (COUP-TF) represses transcription from the promoter of the gene for ornithine transcarbamylase in a manner antagonistic to hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 (HNF-4). J Biol Chem 268:11125 to 11133[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kharbanda S, Nakamura T, Stone R, Hass R, Bernstein S, Datta R, Sukhatme VP, Kufe D 1991 Expression of the early growth response 1 and 2 zinc finger genes during induction of monocytic differentiation. J Clin Invest 88:571 to 577[Medline] Fruchart JC, Duriez P, Staels B 1999 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- activators regulate genes governing lipoprotein metabolism, vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis. Curr Opin Lipidol 10:245 to 257[CrossRef][Medline] Sladek FM, Zhong WM, Lai E, Darnell Jr JE 1990 Liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-4 is a novel member of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily. Genes Dev 4:2353 to 2365[Abstract] Li J, Ning G, Duncan SA 2000 Mammalian hepatocyte differentiation requires the transcription factor HNF-4. Genes Dev 14:464 to 474[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sladek FM Orphan receptor HNF4 and liver-specific gene expression. Receptor 3:207 to 230 Fraser JD, Martinez V, Straney R, Briggs MR 1998 DNA binding and transcription activation specificity of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4. Nucleic Acids Res 26:2702 to 2707[Abstract/Free Full Text] Hayhurst GP, Lee YH, Lambert G, Ward JM, Gonzalez FJ 2001 Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (nuclear receptor 2A1) is essential for maintenance of hepatic gene expression and lipid homeostasis. Mol Cell Biol 21:1393 to 1403[Abstract/Free Full Text] Tsai SY, Tsai MJ 1997 Chick ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factors (COUP-TFs): coming of age. Endocr Rev 18:229 to 240[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sack MN, Disch DL, Rockman HA, Kelly DP 1997 A role for Sp and nuclear receptor transcription factors in a cardiac hypertrophic growth program. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:6438 to 6443[Abstract/Free Full Text] Pereira FA, Qiu Y, Zhou G, Tsai MJ, Tsai SY 1999 The orphan nuclear receptor COUP-TFII is required for angiogenesis and heart development. Genes Dev 13:1037 to 1049[Abstract/Free Full Text] Nakamura T, Fox-Robichaud A, Kikkawa R, Kashiwagi A, Kojima H, Fujimiya M, Wong NC 1999 Transcription factors and age-related decline in apolipoprotein A-I expression. J Lipid Res 40:1709 to 1718[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sterchele PF, Sun H, Peterson RE, Vanden Heuvel JP 1996 Regulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- mRNA in rat liver. Arch Biochem Biophys 326:281 to 289[CrossRef][Medline] Eisen LP, Elsasser MS, Harmon JM 1988 Positive regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human T-cells sensitive to the cytolytic effects of glucocorticoids. J Biol Chem 263:12044 to 12048[Abstract/Free Full Text] Dai JL, Burnstein KL 1996 Two androgen response elements in the androgen receptor coding region are required for cell-specific up-regulation of receptor messenger RNA. Mol Endocrinol 10:1582 to 1594[Abstract] Donaghue C, Westley BR, May FE 1999 Selective promoter usage of the human estrogen receptor- gene and its regulation by estrogen. Mol Endocrinol 13:1934 to 1950[Abstract/Free Full Text] Myers KA, Lambe KG, Aldridge TC, Macdonald N, Tugwood JD 1997 Amino acid residues in both the DNA-binding and ligand-binding domains influence transcriptional activity of the human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 239:522 to 526[CrossRef][Medline] Chomczynski P, Sacchi N 1987 Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal Biochem 162:156 to 159[CrossRef][Medline] Bonazzi A, Mastyugin V, Mieyal PA, Dunn MW, Laniado-Schwartman M 2000 Regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 by hypoxia and peroxisome proliferators in the corneal epithelium. J Biol Chem 275:2837 to 2844[Abstract/Free Full Text] Staels B, Vu-Dac N, Kosykh VA, Saladin R, Fruchart JC, Dallongeville J, Auwerx J 1995 Fibrates downregulate apolipoprotein C-III expression independent of induction of peroxisomal acyl coenzyme A oxidase. A potential mechanism for the hypolipidemic action of fibrates. J Clin Invest 95:705 to 712[Medline] Raspe E, Madsen L, Lefebvre AM, Leitersdorf I, Gelman L, Peinado-Onsurbe J, Dallongeville J, Fruchart JC, Berge R, Staels B 1999 Modulation of rat liver apolipoprotein gene expression and serum lipid levels by tetradecylthioacetic acid (TTA) via PPAR activation. J Lipid Res 40:2099 to 2110[Abstract/Free Full Text] Malik S, Karathanasis S 1995 Transcriptional activation by the orphan nuclear receptor ARP-1. Nucleic Acids Res 23:1536 to 1543[Abstract]
