Women and Alzheimer s Disease1 Alan J. Lerner
Department of Neurology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44120
Address all correspondence and requests for reprint to: Dr. Alan J. Lerner, Alzheimer Center, 12200 Fairhill Road, Cleveland, Ohio 44120. E-mail: ajl3{at}po.cwru.edu
Alzheimer s disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease associated with aging. It can also be classified as a complex polygenetic disease, such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, or schizophrenia, because there are both genetic and environmental factors that result in the phenotypic expression of what is clinically called AD. Due to the demographic shifts and remarkable medical advances of the last century, aging populations are now the fastest growing portions of the population, and women constitute a majority of this population due to their increased life expectancy relative to males. Thus, women would appear to be at special risk for AD, although this review will also focus on gender differences in disease expression and opportunities for treatment using estrogen replacement therapy (ERT).
Alzheimer s disease was first described by Alois Alzheimer in 1906, based on a single case of a 51-yr-old woman who developed severe behavioral disturbances, aphasia, and memory loss. Alzheimer followed the patient for several years and described the classic neuropathological findings of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic amyloid plaques in her brain postmortem. Emil Kraeplin proposed the disease eponym several years after his initial description. Remarkably, Alzheimer s original notes, and the original neuropathological specimens have been recovered within the past 2 yr, confirming that the patient did indeed have AD by modern diagnostic criteria (1, 2).
Epidemiology
Although AD was long believed to be a rare disease, awareness of AD prevalence was highlighted in the late 1960s and 1970s by Blessed and colleagues (3) and Katzman (4). Present epidemiological data suggest that dementia, defined as the clinical state of acquired cognitive loss in multiple domains, affects about 5 to 7% of individuals over age 65 yr. In the East Boston study of community-dwelling elderly, by age 85 yr up to 47% of individuals will suffer dementia (5). The vast majority of these cases will have AD. Translated into population statistics, these numbers imply a current U.S. prevalence of about 4 million cases. This has been estimated to cost between 70 to 100 billion dollars/yr, much of it due to the need for long term care facilities.
With women over 65 yr of age outnumbering men (20 million women vs. 13.9 million men in the U.S.), and with an American women who reaches age 65 yr having an average life expectancy of 19 yr (15.5 yr for men), women appear to be at particular risk for AD. Meta-analysis of population prevalence studies found no sex difference in overall dementia prevalence by gender, but showed that AD rates tend to be higher in females, and vascular dementia tends to be more common in males. A meta-analysis of incidence studies (6) across different nationalities showed little difference in overall gender-specific incidence. AD incidence for women showed a steeper age-incidence curve, indicating a higher incidence at older ages. East Asian countries had lower AD incidence than Europe or the U.S., but their incidence curve steepens with age, which may reflect environmental or genetic differences contributing to AD risk.
The issue of AD in the oldest old (over age 85 yr) has also been investigated, with particular reference to whether AD is an inevitable part of aging (7). Genetic marker studies involving apolipoprotein E (Apo E), whose e4 allele is a well established disease risk modifier (see below), have also suggested that the vast majority of Apo E e4 carriers will be demented by age 120 yr, although the incidence curves also become flatter after age 90 yr. Jorm and Jolly (6) found no evidence of incidence curve flattening after age 90 yr. These studies are beginning to provide scientific basis for anecdotes suggesting that great longevity need not be accompanied by inevitable deterioration of cognition.
Studies in developing nations have produced interesting results regarding gender issues and environmental and genetic risks for AD. In rural elderly in Northern India, Chandra et al. found no gender or literacy association, although prevalence increased with age (8). A low prevalence and incidence were been found in Ibadan, Nigeria compared to that in African-Americans in Indianapolis, IN (8.24% in Indianapolis vs. 2.3% in Ibadan) (9). A cross-cultural study of Japanese-American men living in Hawaii found that height correlated negatively with dementia prevalence, suggesting that early life dietary adequacy may play a role in late-onset brain disorders (10). Studies are currently underway in geographically or genetically isolated populations, such as Central Kenya, Brazil, and Israeli Arabs, and many others that may help determine whether genetic or environmental factors, such as toxins, literacy and education, physical activity, nicotine exposure, or other variables are important in determining AD development (11, 12, 13). One methodological issue in all of these studies, especially in developing nations, is the censuring effect of competing sources of mortality, which would tend to favor AD expression in women. More subtly, the life experiences of women, their educational and vocational opportunities, their access to health care, medications, and disease exposures may affect their risks of AD in ways that current research is only beginning to comprehend.
Genetic risk factors
Beginning with the observation that individuals with Down s syndrome almost universally develop neuropathological and frequently clinical evidence of AD by age 35 yr and the discovery of familial forms of AD, interest in the genetic risk factors for AD has been an active field of investigation. To date, three AD genes have been isolated: mutations of the amyloid precursor protein on chromosome 21 (21q21), of presenilin-1 on chromosome 14 (14q24.3), and of presenilin-2 on chromosome 1 (1q31.42). These rare mutations have generated new insights into the molecular biology of AD in terms of amyloid processing and differential processing of the APP, but are clinically very rare. The most important AD gene identified to date is the disease risk modifier, Apo E (19q13.2), particularly the presence of the e4 allele (14, 15). Apo E e4 status has been associated with both late-onset and early-onset familial forms of AD, as well as being a general risk factor for AD. Individuals carrying at least one e4 allele have between a 25 to 40% lifetime chance of developing AD. In a meta-analysis of Apo E and AD studies, women who have at least one e4 allele appear to be at greater risk for AD, with the strongest effects occurring between age 50 to 75 yr (16). Caucasian women with the e3/e4 genotype were 1.5 times more likely to develop AD than males with that genotype. Similar results were seen with women possessing an e2/e4 genotype, but due to sample size considerations they did not reach statistical significance. Apo E does not appear to be as strong an AD risk factor in African-American or Hispanic samples, but among Hispanic women, sex-related trends similar to those in Caucasian samples are detected. This gender effect was not seen in Japanese women in the meta-analysis study. The reason for this genetic sexual dimorphism is unclear, but it may represent an interaction with postmenopausal ERT or possibly a sex-specific susceptibility among e3/e4 heterozygotes (17). Women with a positive family history and an e4 allele may also have an earlier age at onset (18).
Environmental risk factors
Besides aging, a large number of environmental risk factors have been investigated. Particular interest has focused on whether certain exposures may be protective, such as the relationship of education to the concept of functional neuronal reserve, and the commonly held idea of "use it or lose it." The results of epidemiological studies are inconsistent, but protective risk factors may include postmenopausal ERT, smoking, more education, and chronic exposure to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications. Positive risk factors include history of depression, head injury (particularly in individuals with the Apo E e4 allele), and possibly thyroid disease.
ERT has been shown to be protective for developing AD in a number of studies and appears to be a dose-related phenomenon (19, 20, 21). Exposure of only 1 yr postmenopausally appears to provide some risk reduction in terms of both disease development and age of onset, even many years later. The crude odds ratio for ERT exposure in the New York, Cleveland, and Baltimore studies has been about 0.4. The relative risk reduction from ERT may interact with other risk factors, such as Apo E genotype, smoking, and history of AD in first degree relatives. The public health aspects of this have begun to be investigated, and more study is needed to determine whether agents such as selective estrogen receptor modulators will produce similar effects. Judging from the experience with ERT use in cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis, it may take many years to understand the full implications on a risk-benefit basis, but the impact of AD is often so catastrophic that further study is necessary. The role of ERT in acute treatment of established AD is discussed below.
The biology of how ERT can modify AD development is complex, with probably several components interacting. These include the importance of estrogen in normal brain development, the presence of estrogen receptors in brain areas important to memory systems such as hippocampus, estrogen-induced changes in Apo E messenger ribonucleic acid expression, increased cerebral blood flow, trophic effects on neuronal systems, and interactions with the basal forebrain cholinergic system, which degenerates in AD and is a major therapeutic target for treatment. Estrogens have been shown to be involved in axonal elongation, enhancing the outgrowth of nerve cell processes in vitro and promoting the formation of synapses and dendritic spines
Clinical features
The clinical expression of AD is quite variable, with diagnostic criteria requiring a mixture of memory deficits in addition to deficits in other aspects of cognition, such as language, praxis, agnosia, or executive function disturbance (e.g. planning, abstraction, and judgment). Behavioral manifestations are common and include depression, agitation, delusions, and hallucinations, or anxiety syndromes. Sleep disorders and purposeless behaviors such as pacing may also occur in individual patients. Few studies have addressed the gender specificity of clinical expression. Studies of gender difference in AD need to be interpreted cautiously in light of underlying gender differences in lateralization and visual-spatial and language abilities occurring in normal development.
In a longitudinal study of AD patients compared to normal elderly, female AD patients performed worse than male AD patients on tests of naming, vocabulary, and word recognition skills, but not on syntactic measures (22). These deficits persisted during longitudinal follow-up and contrast with no gender differences in these measures in normal elderly. Henderson and Buckwalter (23, 24) also found gender differences on the Mini-Mental status examination score related to language dysfunction. No gender differences were found using the Blessed test (a cognitive screening instrument), and the rate of deterioration was similar in both sexes (25).
The biological basis for this difference in language abilities in AD may be due to several factors. AD women have a much stronger correlation of disease state with postdexamethasone cortisol levels than men (26). Regional cerebral blood flows measured by positron emission tomography in AD have been described, with women having higher mean nonweighted metabolic rates than men (27). The explanations for these phenomena include differences in the regional pattern of cell loss and ss-amyloid deposition, which is coupled to regional cerebral blood flow. Dexamethasone resistance has been associated with damage to the hippocampal formation, which is intimately involved in short term memory processing (28). Baseline differences in neural organization, such as increased lateralization in males, may influence patterns of language breakdown, becoming magnified with disease progression.
The Nun study also showed the importance of early life experiences and possible interactions with genetic background. Linguistic abilities, as measured by an analysis of idea density and grammatical complexity in an autobiographical essay written on entrance to a convent, predicted late life cognitive outcome. Among 14 sisters who died, AD was present in all with low linguistic ability but in none of those with a high degree of linguistic complexity (29).
Noncognitive symptoms may also show gender differences. Males tend to have more problems with verbal aggressiveness, preoccupation with bodily function, and apathy. In multiple regression model analysis of the Dementia Behavior Disturbance Scale, there were no gender differences in behavior severity. However, males scored higher on scales of apathy and vegetative signs, whereas females showed more reclusive behavior and emotional lability, with behaviors such as hoarding, refusing help, and inappropriate laughter and crying (30). Differences in baseline behavior may contribute to these findings, and differences in levels of androgens and estrogens may play a role in behavioral expression.
The identification of Apo E, its role in cholesterol transport, and its risk factor status for cardiovascular disease have led to a reappraisal of the role of vascular factors in AD. Although ss-amyloid is found in meningeal vessels, no consistent evidence of a systemic amyloidosis has been identified in AD. Cerebral ischemia may complicate AD, leading to decrements in neuropsychological performance and faster clinical progression, as suggested by the findings in the Nun study (31).
Overall disease survival from onset and diagnosis is variable, but averages between 8 to 10 yr. Many investigators have used age at onset or particular clinical features to investigate the possibility of AD subgroups, but these have not been shown to have consistent biological validity. Factors associated with quicker progression include the presence of family history, onset at an early age, extrapyramidal symptoms, psychosis, and comorbid medical conditions. In our study of two large cohorts, smoking did not affect disease survival (32). Moritz et al. (33) found men had shorter survival times than women, with shorter male survival associated with more psychiatric symptomatology. Among women, but not men, a history of cardiovascular disease was associated with poorer survival.
Treatment
The major basis for current pharmacological treatment of AD is based on the cholinergic hypothesis. The cholinergic system radiates from basal forebrain nuclei and degenerates early in AD, and cholinergic markers correlate with disease course. Enhancement of cholinergic function by acetylcholinesterase inhibitors has been demonstrated to improve cognitive functioning compared to the effect of placebo and may have effects on noncognitive symptoms and vegetative symptoms as well (34, 35). A retrospective review of data from the 30-week tacrine trial (36) showed that the most robust improvements in neuropsychological testing occurred in women with concurrent ERT or recent treatment (within 3 months of trial enrollment) (37).
The cognitive effects of ERT have been investigated in a number of human models since the 1950s. In surgically or naturally menopausal women, ERT has been associated with enhanced short and long term memory and increased capacity for learning paired associations. Visual memory, however, does not improve with ERT (38). In women aged 32 to 36 yr old with uterine myomas given a GnRH agonist (GnRH-a) for 12 weeks, verbal memory scores declined significantly. This was followed by GnRH-a with estrogen or placebo, with the former group showing improvements to baseline verbal scores but continued poorer performance in the GnRH-a and placebo cohort. These results suggest that estrogen deprivation effects are reversible with replacement, at least in the short term (39).
Serum levels of endogenous estrogens are not consistently correlated with cognitive performance in older women (40). Animal studies using paradigms such as ovariectomized animals and standardized behavioral tests have shown a wide variety of interactions of estrogens with cholinergic, dopaminergic, and serotoninergic neurotransmitter systems important for modulating memory, mood, and affect (41, 42, 43, 44, 45). Estrogens also facilitate hippocampal neuronal long term potentiation, a model for memory formation (46); protect against memory-impairing compounds, such as anticholinergics and benzodiazepines (44, 47, 48); and reduce neuronal responses to oxidative stress (49). Human studies have shown conflicting results in longitudinal and cross-sectional studies, with most studies showing only a modest effect on selected neuropsychological variables such as explicit memory or visual-spatial skills, but not immediate memory (50, 51, 52, 53). It is likely that the memory-promoting effects of acute estrogen replacement derive from its pleiotropic action in the central nervous system, including interactions with estrogen receptors with changes in gene expression, as well as up-regulation of other neurotransmitter systems, as indicated by extensive data from animal models.
In patients with established cognitive impairment, early open label studies and more recent randomized studies using current AD diagnostic criteria have showed trends toward improvements in several neuropsychological and behavioral ratings. However, many of these studies have been quite small and of relatively short duration ( < 6 months) (54). A larger, longer, multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled study in established AD women is underway, and results will be available shortly.
Care-giving and AD
Implicit in the progressive deterioration of cognitive and self-care abilities in AD is the reality that care will be rendered to assist the patient with activities of daily living. Even in the United States, with its well developed system of long term care facilities for dementia patients, it is estimated that 80% of care occurs in the informal home setting. The most consistent finding in care-giving research is that the majority of family care-givers are women, providing approximately two thirds of care for AD patients. This compares to 80 to 90% of care provided by women among adult child care-givers. In studying the content of care-giving, women are more likely than men to carry out personal care activities, such as bathing, dressing, or personal hygiene. Women are more likely to attend to household chores and are equally likely to deal with money management compared to men (55).
Long term care in nursing facilities may be necessary in the later stages of AD. Major determinants of institutionalization include incontinence, behavioral disturbance, strength of the care-giving bond (spouses are most likely to continue home care), as well as underlying social and cultural values. Besides the moral and cultural issues, the cost to society for long term care has led to programs to enhance the home care system, reducing care-giver burden and attempting to forestall spousal and family impoverishment frequently imposed by the tremendous costs of long term care. Attempts to change this at the level of national health care programs, such as Medicare, have not been instituted to date.
Studies focusing on the burdens of care-giving have generally identified that women experience more distress as a result of this role, which may relate to the content of the role as well as the long term stress-coping mechanisms. Although the acute effects of care-giving, such as anger, guilt, and depression, are well known and can clearly affect the quality of care, long term health effects of care-giving in AD are less documented (56).
Two endocrine aspects are relevant to care-giving. A voluminous literature exists on biological measures of stress, such as hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis responsivity, but relatively little is known about ways to quantify the actions of care-giving and to correlate with stress markers. Chronic glucocorticoid exposure from hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis stimulation may damage hippocampal neurons, (28) possibly lending a biological basis to the neuropsychiatric hazards associated with care-giving. The effects of ERT as an adjunct to mood maintenance via interactions with serotoninergic and adrenergic systems suggest that ERT may augment the antidepressant drug response (57).
Summary and conclusion
AD is a major public health problem, and demographic trends have led to its being called the epidemic of the century. Because of increased longevity and the special challenges of ERT, women are well placed to both be at risk for and the beneficiaries of advances in AD therapy. Overall increases in health consciousness may impact future AD risk, and it is encouraging that women frequently outnumber men in clinical trials of new therapeutic agents in AD. The risk of AD from environmental exposures in the overall life experiences of women is unclear. To the extent that education and work promote the development of brain areas such as the association cortex that are preferentially affected in AD, creating a neuronal reserve, advances in women s overall place in society may further help protect them from the ravages of AD.
Footnotes
1 Supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health P50-AG08012.
Received December 4, 1998.
Revised February 23, 1999.
Accepted February 23, 1999.
References
Maurer K, Volk S, Gerbaldo H, Auguste D. 1997 Alzheimer s disease. Lancet. 349:1546 to 1549.[CrossRef][Medline] Enserink M. 1998 First Alzheimer s diagnosis confirmed. Science. 279:2037.[Free Full Text] Blessed G, Tomlinson BE, Roth M. 1968 The association between quantitative measures of dementia and of senile change in the grey matter of elderly subjects. Br J Psychiatry. 114:797 to 811.[Medline] Katzman R. 1976 The prevalence and malignancy of Alzheimer s disease: A major killer. Arch Neurol. 33:217 to 218.[CrossRef][Medline] Evans DA, Funkenstein HH, Albert MS, et al. 1989 Prevalence of Alzheimer s disease in a community population of older persons: higher than previously reported. JAMA. 262:2551 to 2556.[Abstract] Jorm AF, Jolley D. 1998 The incidence of dementia: a meta-analysis. Neurology. 51:728 to 733.[Abstract] Drachman DA. 1994 If we live long enough, will we all be demented? Neurology. 44:1563 to 1565.[Medline] Chandra V, Ganguli M, Pandav R, Johnston J, Belle S, DeKosky ST. 1998 Prevalence of Alzheimer s disease and other dementias in rural India: the Indo-US study. Neurology. 51:1000 to 1008.[Abstract] Hendrie HC, Osuntokun BO, Hall KS, et al. 1995 Prevalence of Alzheimer s disease and dementia in two communities: Nigerian Africans and African Americans. Am J Psychiatry. 152:1485 to 1492.[Abstract] Abbott RD, White LR, Ross GW, et al. 1998 Height as a marker of childhood development and late-life cognitive function: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Pediatrics. 102:602 to 609.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Friedland RP, Bowirrat A, Treves T, Chapman J, Korczyn AD. 1998 Alzheimer s disease prevalence is high in Israeli Arabs. Neurobiol Aging. 19:S139. Sayi JG, Patel NB, Premkumar DR, et al. 1997 Apolipoprotein E polymorphism in elderly east Africans. East Afr Med J. 74:668 to 670.[Medline] Caramelli P, Herera E, Nitrini R. 1998 The impact of illiteracy on the prevalence of dementia in a Brazilian cohort. Neruobiol Aging. 19:S28. Corder EH, Saunders AM, Strittmatter WJ, et al. 1993 Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer s disease in late onset families. Science. 261:921 to 923.[Medline] Strittmatter WJ, Saunders AM, Schmechel D, et al. 1993 Apolipoprotein E: high avidity binding to ss-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 90:1977 to 1981.[Abstract] Farrer LA, Cupples LA, Haines JL, et al. 1997 Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. JAMA. 278:1349 to 1356.[Abstract] Payami H, Montee KR, Kaye JA, et al. 1994 Alzheimer s disease, apolipoprotein E4, and gender. JAMA. 271:1316 to 1317.[CrossRef][Medline] Duara R, Barker WW, Lopez-Alberola R, et al. 1996 Alzheimer s disease: interaction of apolipoprotein E genotype, family history of dementia, gender, education, ethnicity, and age of onset. Neurology. 46:1575 to 1579.[Abstract] Tang MX, Jacobs D, Stern Y, et al. 1996 Effect of estrogen during menopause on risk and age at onset of Alzheimer s disease. Lancet. 348:249 to 252.[CrossRef] Lerner AJ, Koss E, Debanne SM, Rowland DY, Smyth KA, Friedland RP. 1997 Interactions of smoking history with estrogen replacement therapy as protective factors for Alzheimer s disease. Lancet. 349:403 to 404.[Medline] Kawas C, Resnick S, Morrison A, et al. 1997 A prospective study of estrogen replacement therapy and the risk of developing Alzheimer s disease: The Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. Neurology. 48:1517 to 1521.[Abstract] Ripich DN, Petrill SA, Whitehouse PJ, Ziol EW. 1995 Gender differences in language of AD patients: a longitudinal study. Neurology. 45:299 to 302.[Abstract] Henderson VW, Buckwalter JG. 1994 Cognitive deficits of men and women with Alzheimer s disease. Neurology. 44:90 to 96.[Abstract] Buckwalter JG, Sobel E, Dunn ME, Diz MM, Henderson VW. 1993 Gender differences on a brief measure of cognitive functioning in Alzheimer s disease Arch Neurol. 50:757 to 760.[Abstract] Stern RG, Mohs RC, Bierer LM, et al. 1992 Deterioration on the Blessed test in Alzheimer s disease: longitudinal data and their implications for clinical trials and identification of subtypes. Psychiatry Res. 42:101 to 110.[CrossRef][Medline] Oxenkrug GF, Gurevich D, Siegel B, Dumlao MS, Gershon S. 1989 Correlation between brain-adrenal axis activation and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer s disease: is there a gender effect? Psychiatry Res. 29:169 to 175.[CrossRef][Medline] Small GW, Kuhl DE, Riege, et al. 1989 Cerebral Glucose metabolic patterns in Alzheimer s disease: effect of gender and age at dementia onset. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 46:527 to 532.[Abstract] Sapolsky RM. 1992 Stress, the aging brain, and the mechanisms of cell death. Cambridge: MIT Press. Snowdon DA, Kemper SJ, Mortimer JA, Greiner LH, Wekstein DR, Markesbery WR. 1996 Linguistic ability in early life and cognitive function and Alzheimer s disease in late life. JAMA. 275:528 to 532.[Abstract] Ott BR, Tate CA, Gordon NM, Heindel WC. 1996 Gender differences in the behavioral manifestations of Alzheimer s disease. J Am Geriatr Soc. 44:583 587.[Medline] Snowdon DA, Greiner LH, Mortimer JA, Riley KP, Greiner PA, Markesbery WR. 1997 Brain infarction and the clinical expression of Alzheimer disease. The Nun study. JAMA. 277:813 to 817.[Abstract] Friedland RP, Farrer LA, Cupples LA, Debanne SM, Lerner AJ, MIRAGE study group. 1998 Smoking and risk of Alzheimer s disease. Lancet. 352:819.[CrossRef] Moritz DJ, Fox PJ, Luscombe FA, Kraemer HC. 1997 Neurological and psychiatric predictors of mortality in patients with Alzheimer disease in California. Arch Neurol. 54:878 to 885.[Abstract] Cummings JL, Masterman DL. 1998 Assessment of treatment-associated changes in behavior and cholinergic therapy of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer s disease. J Clin Psychiatry. 59(Suppl 13):23 to 30. Cummings JL, Back C. 1998 The cholinergic hypothesis of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer s disease. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 6:S64 to S78. Knapp MJ. Knopman DS, Solomon PR, Pendlebury WW, Davis CS, Gracon SI. 1994 A 30-week randomized controlled trial of high-dose tacrine in patients with Alzheimer s disease. JAMA. 271:985 to 991.[Abstract] Schneider LS, Farlow MR, Henderson VW, Pogoda JM. 1996 Effects of estrogen replacement therapy on response to tacrine in patients with Alzheimer s disease. Neurology. 46:1580 to 1584.[Abstract] Sherwin BB. 1997 Estrogen effects on cognition in menopausal women. Neurology. 48(Suppl 7):S21 to S26. Sherwin BB, Tulandi T. 1996 "Add-back" estrogen reverses cognitive deficits induced by a gonadotropin releasing-hormone agonist in women with leiomyomata uteri. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 81:2545 to 2549.[Abstract] Yaffe K, Grady D, Pressman A, Cummings S. 1998 Serum estrogen levels, cognitive performance, and risk of cognitive decline in older community women. J Am Geriatr Soc. 46:816 to 821.[Medline] Luine VN, Richards ST, Wu VY, Beck KD. 1998 Estradiol enhances learning and memory in a spatial memory task and effects levels of monoaminergic neurotransmitters. Horm Behav. 34:149 to 162.[CrossRef][Medline] Osterlund MK, Hurd Yl. 1998 Acute 17ss-estradiol treatment down-regulates serotonin 5HT1A receptor mRNA expression in the limbic system of female rats. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 55:169 to 172.[CrossRef][Medline] Daniel JM, Fader AJ, Spencer AL, Dohanich GP. 1997 Estrogen enhances performance of female rats during acquisition of a radial arm maze. Horm Behav. 32:217 to 225.[CrossRef][Medline] Packard MG, Teather LA. 1997 Posttraining estradiol injections enhance memory in ovariectomized rats: cholinergic blockade and synergism. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 68:172 to 188.[CrossRef][Medline] Packard MG, Teather LA. 1997 Intra-hippocampal estradiol infusion enhances memory in ovariectomized rats. NeuroReport. 8:3009 to 3013.[Medline] Cordoba Montoya DA, Carrer HF. 1997 Estrogen facilitates induction of long term potentiation in the hippocampus of awake rats. Brain Res. 778:430 to 438.[CrossRef][Medline] Fader AJ, Hendrichson AW, Dohanich GP. 1998 Estrogen improves performance of reinforced T-maze alternation and prevents the amnestic effects of scopolamine administered systemically or intrahippocampally. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 69:225 to 240.[CrossRef][Medline] Gibbs RB, Burke AM, Johnson DA. 1998 Estrogen replacement attenuates effects of scopolamine and lorazepam on memory acquisition and retention. Horm Behav. 34:112 to 125.[CrossRef][Medline] Sawada H, Ibi M, Kihara T, Urushitani T, Akaike A, Shimohama S. 1998 Estradiol protects mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons from oxidative stress-induced neuronal death. J Neurosci Res. 54:707 to 719.3.0.CO;2-T 603.[CrossRef][Medline] Greendale GA, Reboussin BA, Hogan P et al. 1998 Symptom relief and side effects of postmenopausal hormones: results from the Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Intervention Trial. Obstet Gynecol. 92:982 to 988.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Polo-Kantola P, Portin R, Polo O, Helenius H, Irjala K, Erkkola R. 1998 The effect of short-term estrogen replacement therapy on cognition: a randomized, double-blind, cross-over trial in postmenopausal women. Obstet Gynecol. 91:459 to 466.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Resnick SM, Metter EJ, Zonderman AB. 1997 Estrogen replacement therapy and longitudinal decline in visual memory. A possible protective effect? Neurology. 49:1491 to 1497.[Abstract] Schneider LS, Finch CE. 1997 Can estrogens prevent neurodegeneration? Drugs Aging. 11:87 to 95.[Medline] Miller B, Cafasso L. 1992 Gender differences in caregiving: fact or artifact? Gerontologist. 32:498 to 507.[Abstract] Mace NL, Whitehouse PJ, Smyth KA. 1993 Management of patients with dementia. In: Whitehouse PJ, ed. Dementia. Philadelphia: Davis; 400 to 416. Halbreich U. 1997 Role of estrogen in postmenopausal depression. Neurology. 48(Suppl 7):S16 to S20.
