Quantitative Trait Loci Near the Insulin-Degrading Enzyme (IDE) Gene Contribute to Variation in Plasma Insulin Levels Harvest F. Gu1, Suad Efendic1, Sofia Nordman1, Claes-Goran Ostenson1, Kerstin Brismar1, Anthony J. Brookes2, and Jonathan A. Prince2
1 Department of Molecular Medicine, Rolf Luft Center for Diabetes Research, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden 2 Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS REFERENCES   Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) plays a principal role in the proteolysis of several peptides in addition to insulin and is encoded by IDE, which resides in a region of chromosome 10q that is linked to type 2 diabetes. Two recent studies presented genetic association data on IDE and type 2 diabetes (one positive and the other negative), but neither explored the fundamental question of whether polymorphism in IDE has a measurable influence on insulin levels in human populations. To address this possibility, 14 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from a linkage disequilibrium block encompassing IDE have been genotyped in a sample of 321 impaired glucose tolerant and 403 nondiabetic control subjects. Analyses based on haplotypic genotypes (diplotypes), constructed with SNPs that differentiate common extant haplotypes extending across IDE, provided compelling evidence of association with fasting insulin levels (P = 0.0009), 2-h insulin levels (P = 0.0027), homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (P = 0.0001), and BMI (P = 0.0067), with effects exclusively evident in men. The strongest evidence for an effect of a single marker was obtained for rs2251101 (located near the 3' untranslated region of IDE) on 2-h insulin levels (P = 0.000023). Diplotype analyses, however, suggest the presence of multiple interacting trait-modifying sequences in the region. Results indicate that polymorphism in/near IDE contributes to a large proportion of variance in plasma insulin levels and correlated traits, but questions of sex specificity and allelic heterogeneity will need to be taken into consideration as the molecular basis of the observed phenotypic effects unfolds.
The gene encoding insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) is located on chromosome 10q23-q24, within a region linked to type 2 diabetes and related quantitative traits (1 to 4 ). IDE is the major enzyme responsible for insulin proteolysis in vitro (5) and shares structural and functional homology with bacterial protease III, which may function in the termination of the insulin response (6,7). In mice, IDE hypofunction induced by IDE gene disruption leads to hyperinsulinemia (8). Furthermore, IDE activity in the diabetic Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rat is reduced by 30%, where polymorphism in IDE is likely to be the main contributing factor (9). Congruence of positional and functional data indicates that sequence variation in IDE may play a role in modifying insulin metabolism in human populations. Two recent genetic association studies investigated the IDE region in relation to type 2 diabetes. One produced significant evidence for effects on both type 2 diabetes and plasma glucose levels (10), whereas the other explored only case-control models and obtained no evidence of association (11). Neither of these studies, however, attempted to directly relate IDE variants to measures of insulin metabolism.
To evaluate the potential influence of genetic variation in IDE on insulin levels and correlated quantitative traits, a haplotype-tagging strategy was used (12) in a Swedish sample consisting of 321 impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and 403 nondiabetic control subjects (Table 1). This study follows a recent report (13) in which we examined 26 polymorphic markers extending across IDE in relation to Alzheimer s disease in a large Swedish population. These were used to define regional linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure, which highlighted a LD block spanning 276 kb around IDE. Three single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers were identified as capable of delineating common haplotypes ( > 5%) in Swedes and were subsequently used in tests of association.
View this table:    TABLE 1 Clinical characteristics of the IGT and nondiabetic control subjects
  For the present study, 14 SNP markers extending locally across IDE were examined (Fig. 1), including previously identified tag markers. We began by genotyping these in the entire male sample to define LD structure and to identify common haplotypes. All 14 markers were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Pairwise marker correlations suggested strong LD in the region, in agreement with earlier data (13). Common haplotypes (those  > 5% frequency), inferred with HAPLOTYPER using all 14 markers, were similar to those obtained based on a slightly modified marker set (13). LD estimates and inferred haplotypes for the entire sample are shown in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. The definition of Patil et al. (14) ( = 0.8) was used to confirm that the studied region does represent an LD block. We also confirmed that a selection of three tag markers equivalent to those previously used (13) would be able to delineate common haplotypes and opted not to explore the use of alternative equally valid marker sets. We note that a variety of different approaches exist for defining optimal SNP sets (15), but we have not explored their use here. These and other issues may have relevance for attempts at replicating or refuting the present data, as LD structures can differ markedly between divergent populations (K.K. Kidd, A.J.B., personal communication).
View larger version (48K):    FIG. 1. Details of examined SNPs in IDE.
  View larger version (68K):    FIG. 2. Pairwise LD for 14 SNP markers extending across IDE.
  View larger version (24K):    FIG. 3. Common haplotypes extending across IDE.
  For initial analyses, our intention was to reduce the number of exploratory tests by examining a critical set of phenotypes against a limited number of haplotypic genotypes (also referable to as diplotypes for brevity, we have opted to use the latter term throughout this report). The principal criterion for diplotype construction is that they can be inferred with high probability and thus reflect with fidelity combinations of common haplotypes for each individual. In the presence of limited allelic heterogeneity, this can be advantageous over single marker tests, which can fail to detect effects due to insufficient or complex patterns of LD with pathogenic variants. In addition, testing many single markers requires a substantial degree of multiple testing. Our selection of quantitative phenotypes for analyses included six traits typically examined in relation to diabetes (16 to 18), and these are listed in Table 1. We note that studies (19,20) that have investigated IDE in relation to diabetes did not report efforts to relate genotypes to either insulin levels or obesity. Trait distributions were highly skewed or partially skewed for all six studied phenotypes, and thus only log-transformed data were modeled. Correlations between traits were extremely high, as was expected (data not shown).
Diplotypes were inferred using the three selected haplotype-tagging markers (Fig. 3) and tested against all six traits highlighted in Table 1 in men and women separately. Six of eight possible haplotypes are predicted using these markers, the sequences for which are H1-TCG, H2-TCA, H3-CCA, H4-TTA, H5-TTG, and H6-CCG. Posterior probability estimates were in excess of 0.80 for all phase calls that represent the various combinations of these haplotypes (a threshold that was set for retaining individuals for analyses). Significant and consistent effects upon traits were evident, with the notable exception of fasting glucose and 2-h glucose levels. Importantly, effects were evident exclusively in men, which are in agreement with results obtained by Karamohamed et al. (10). The results of these analyses are shown in Fig. 4, where data for the male sample are presented. For all analyses, we combined IGT individuals and nondiabetic control subjects and adjusted for any uniform phenotypic differences between them by including their group identity as a factor in ANOVA models. Diplotype by group interaction terms in second-order factorial ANOVA models were not significant. As the above analyses are based on probabilistically inferred data, we considered it important to also explore models that only entail the use of phase-known data. This can be accomplished by excluding individuals that are heterozygous at two or more sites (all individuals with only one heterozygote site are by definition phase known). To demonstrate this, an additional analysis was performed in men on the four associated traits shown in Fig. 4 (insulin, 2-h insulin, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance [HOMA-IR], and BMI). Results revealed association with all four of these, but significance was highest for BMI (F7,220 = 3.5; P = 0.0014) (data for other comparisons not shown). For reference to Fig. 4, the groups that are excluded in this analysis are H1/H3, H2/H5, H3/H4, and H3/H5.
View larger version (114K):    FIG. 4. Diplotype association with quantitative traits in men. Mean values ( plus or minus SE) for fasting glucose (A), 2-h glucose (B), fasting insulin (C), 2-h insulin (D), HOMA (E), and BMI (F) in men according to diplotype groups as estimated using HAPLOTYPER. Untransformed data are shown. Categories with less than six observations have been excluded. F ratios from ANOVA omnibus tests (performed on log-transformed data for all traits) and associated P values are shown in the upper right corner of each diagram. The number of individuals in each category is shown at the base of each column.
  In an attempt to refine the possible position of pathogenic variant(s) in the region, single marker tests were conducted on the phenotypes that provided evidence of association in diplotype models. In considering multiple testing issues, we noted that the strongest individual finding in HOMA-IR (P = 0.0001) affords 500 individual tests before strict multiple testing correction renders this finding insignificant (given = 0.05). These tests, using all 14 markers, were performed only in the male sample because diplotype analyses gave us no a priori reason to suspect that latent associations for single markers would be present in the female set. These results are shown in Fig. 5, where consistent effects of rs2251101 and rs2249960 can be seen upon traits. The common allele at rs2251101 and the rare allele of rs2249960 were associated with lower trait levels. Marker rs2251101 and rs1887922 were tested against fasting glucose levels because the latter was specifically reported on by Karamohamed et al. (10), and these two markers are in extremely high LD (r2  >  0.5) (Fig. 2). Neither marker showed evidence of association, but we acknowledge that the present study has less power than the aforementioned one. The result for rs2251101 upon multiple phenotypes nonetheless supports the likely presence of a primary trait-modifying sequence in the 3' region of IDE, as has been speculated (10). The effect of rs1887922 on 2-h insulin levels was significant, however, albeit considerably attenuated in comparison with rs2251101. To further explore the effects of rs2251101, a final model was fitted in which rare-allele homozygotes and heterozygotes were combined and compared with common allele homozygotes. The results of this were as follows: F1,366 = 9.1, P = 0.0028; F1,363 = 18.4, P = 0.000023; F1,365 = 7.0, P = 0.0085; and F1,365 = 11.4, P = 0.0008; for fasting insulin, 2-h insulin, HOMA-IR, and BMI, respectively. Although throughout this study tests were conducted on the combined IGT and normal samples (and a correction applied for possible differences between them), it was considered important to confirm that an effect exists in both populations in at least one analysis. Using the above model and focusing on the rs2251101 marker and the 2-h insulin trait, significant effects were observed for both the IGT (F1,155 = 13.0, P = 0.0004) and normal (F1,206 = 6.5, P = 0.011) groups; in both cases the common allele homozygote group had the lowest trait levels.
View larger version (49K):    FIG. 5. Single-marker quantitative trait tests in men.
  In summary, we provide strong evidence that sequence variation within or near IDE contributes to variability in measures of insulin metabolism. There are several compelling features to these results. First, both our study and the study by Karamohamed et al. (10) suggest that a primary functional variant occurs in the 3' region of IDE. In addition, the marker that previously exhibited maximum evidence of association, rs1887922 (10), is in very strong LD with the marker (rs2251101) with the greatest effect in the present study. A true pathogenic variant is likely to be in high LD with both of these (and indeed could be one of these markers). Second, both of these studies suggest effects either exclusively or predominantly in male subjects. Numerous studies have detected genetic effects exclusively in men (20,21), and sex specificity may be a major confounding factor in genetic analyses (22). Third, the marker that was in strongest association with quantitative traits related to Alzheimer s disease in our recent study (13) was rs2251101 (from among 26 markers). Importantly, however, the present analyses suggest that there may be more than one functionally relevant polymorphic site in or near IDE. This is evident in diplotype models, where no single haplotype appears responsible for either elevating or reducing trait levels and where a number of possible interactions are also apparent. Evidence of allelic heterogeneity and interaction will in general make fine mapping of the responsible variants a daunting task (23), and this will need to be considered in future studies investigating the IDE region.
We have not directly addressed the question of whether variation in IDE influences the risk for type 2 diabetes. The two studies that have tested this relationship have produced either no or modest evidence of association, despite examining very large clinical samples. Our study provides no evidence of association with fasting glucose levels (the primary phenotype used to distinguish diabetic patients). Rather, the present data likely capture the fundamental influence of IDE upon circulating insulin levels, whereby a genetically determined deficit in enzyme activity may lead to hyperinsulinemia. This could manifest itself as a modulator role in type 2 diabetes, but might be more relevant to other phenotypes, such as coronary heart disease (24) and primary hypertension (25). We believe that continued replication efforts in both normal and morbid populations, as well as functional studies, are now highly merited and will be needed to elucidate the molecular basis and clinical relevance of these observed phenotypic effects.
   RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS REFERENCES   The clinical characteristics of all subjects with IGT and nondiabetic healthy individuals are provided in Table 1. A total of 321 IGT subjects and 403 nondiabetic control subjects were selected from the Stockholm Diabetes Prevention Program (16 to 18). The subjects with IGT were previously diagnosed according to the World Health Organization 1985 criteria and had no medical treatment. Nondiabetic healthy subjects had normal birth body weight, BMI ( < 25 kg/m2), and no relatives of first or second degree with diabetes. All participants in the study are of Swedish ancestry and selected from districts in Stockholm. Informed consent was received from all subjects, and the study was approved by the local ethics committee of the Karolinska Institute. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by using a Puregene DNA purification kit (Gentra, Minneapolis, MN).
Quantitative trait measurements. Insulin resistance was assessed by HOMA (26). The HOMA-IR was then calculated in the present study by using the formula of fasting plasma glucose (in millimoles per liter) x fasting plasma insulin (in milliunits per milliliter)/22.5.
SNP selection and verification. The 14 SNPs examined in this study are listed in Table 2, details on which may be found in the dbSNP database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP) under their respective IDs. Surrounding 50-bp sequences in each direction were examined for repeats and duplicated sequences using RepeatMasker (http://www.repeatmasker.org) and Blast (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast). To verify that SNPs were polymorphic in our study populations, each SNP was tested in a set of 32 Swedish control samples. Assays in which all 32 samples were monomorphic were excluded from further analysis. For convenience, the nomenclature used throughout this report to refer to SNPs is the same as that used in our recent report (13).
Genotyping. Genotyping of SNPs was performed using an induced fluorescence resonance energy transfer modification of dynamic allele-specific hybridization (27,28). All PCRs were run in 10- to 20- microl volumes with 1.5 mmol/l MgCl2 and using 5 to 20 ng genomic DNA. All oligonucleotide sequences for dynamic allele-specific hybridization and PCR assays for SNPs have been presented previously (13).
Statistical analysis. Deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for genotypes at individual loci was assessed using the 2 statistic. Deviation from normality for trait distributions was assessed using a Kolgomorov-Smirnov test. Correlations between traits were established using Spearman s -statistic. Tests for association between genotypes and quantitative traits were performed using ANOVA on log-transformed data and included age and group (IGT or normal) as covariates in all analyses. The above statistical analyses were performed using StatView version 5.0 (Abacus Concepts, Piscataway, NJ). Haplotype frequencies were estimated using the HAPLOTYPER program (29). LD between marker pairs was estimated using the r2 metric (30).
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   This study was supported by the Novo Nordisk Consortium, the Swedish Research Council, the Loo and Hans Osterman Foundation, the Vetenskapligt Arbete Inom Diabetologi Foundation, and the Swedish Diabetes Association.
We thank all of the subjects for participating in the present study, Dr. Bo Ding and Ylva Behr for valuable discussion, and Camilla Lagerberg and Yvonne Stromberg for excellent assistance.
   FOOTNOTES   HOMA-IR, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance; IDE, insulin-degrading enzyme; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance; LD, linkage disequilibrium; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Suad Efendic, Rolf Luft Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Molecular Medicine, L6:B2, Karolinska Hospital, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. E-mail: suad.efendic{at}molmed.ki.se
Received for publication February 23, 2003 and accepted in revised form April 22, 2004
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS REFERENCES   Meigs JB, Panhuysen CI, Myers RH, Wilson PW, Cupples LA: A genome-wide scan for loci linked to plasma levels of glucose and HbA1c in a community-based sample of Caucasian pedigrees: the Framingham Offspring Study. Diabetes51 :833  to 840,2002[Abstract/Free Full Text] Wiltshire S, Hattersley AT, Hitman GA, Walker M, Levy JC, Sampson M, O Rahilly S, Frayling TM, Bell JI, Lathrop GM, Bennett A, Dhillon R, Fletcher C, Groves CJ, Jones E, Prestwich P, Simecek N, Rao PV, Wishart M, Bottazzo GF, Foxon R, Howell S, Smedley D, Cardon LR, Menzel S, McCarthy MI: A genomewide scan for loci predisposing to type 2 diabetes in a U. K. population (the Diabetes UK Warren 2 Repository): analysis of 573 pedigrees provides independent replication of a susceptibility locus on chromosome 1q. Am J Hum Genet69 :553  to 569,2001[Medline] Ghosh S, Watanabe RM, Valle TT, Hauser ER, Magnuson VL, Langefeld CD, Ally DS, Mohlke KL, Silander K, Kohtamaki K, Chines P, Balow J Jr, Birznieks G, Chang J, Eldridge W, Erdos MR, Karanjawala ZE, Knapp JI, Kudelko K, Martin C, Morales-Mena A, Musick A, Musick T, Pfahl C, Porter R, Rayman JB: The Finland-United States investigation of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus genetics (FUSION) study. I. An autosomal genome scan for genes that predispose to type 2 diabetes. Am J Hum Genet67 :1174  to 1185,2000[Medline] Duggirala R, Blangero J, Almasy L, Dyer TD, Williams KL, Leach RJ, O Connell P, Stern MP: Linkage of type 2 diabetes mellitus and of age at onset to a genetic location on chromosome 10q in Mexican Americans. Am J Hum Genet64 :1127  to 1140,1999[Medline] Duckworth WC, Bennett RG, Hamel FG: Insulin degradation: progress and potential. Endocr Rev19 :608  to 624,1998[Abstract/Free Full Text] Affholter JA, Cascieri MA, Bayne ML, Brange J, Casaretto M, Roth RA: Identification of residues in the insulin molecule important for binding to insulin-degrading enzyme. Biochemistry29 :7727  to 7733,1990[Medline] Affholter JA, Hsieh CL, Francke U, Roth RA: Insulin-degrading enzyme: stable expression of the human complementary DNA, characterization of its protein product, and chromosomal mapping of the human and mouse genes. Mol Endocrinol4 :1125  to 1135,1990[Abstract] Farris W, Mansourian S, Chang Y, Lindsley L, Eckman EA, Frosch MP, Eckman CB, Tanzi RE, Selkoe DJ, Guenette S: Insulin-degrading enzyme regulates the levels of insulin, amyloid beta-protein, and the beta-amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A100 :4162  to 4167,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text] Fakhrai-Rad H, Nikoshkov A, Kamel A, Fernstrom M, Zierath JR, Norgren S, Luthman H, Galli J: Insulin-degrading enzyme identified as a candidate diabetes susceptibility gene in GK rats. Hum Mol Genet9 :2149  to 2158,2000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Karamohamed S, Demissie S, Volcjak J, Liu C, Heard-Costa N, Liu J, Shoemaker CM, Panhuysen CI, Meigs JB, Wilson P, Atwood LD, Cupples LA, Herbert A: Polymorphisms in the insulin-degrading enzyme gene are associated with type 2 diabetes in men from the NHLBI Framingham Heart Study. Diabetes52 :1562  to 1567,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text] Groves CJ, Wiltshire S, Smedley D, Owen KR, Frayling TM, Walker M, Hitman GA, Levy JC, O Rahilly S, Menzel S, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI: Association and haplotype analysis of the insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) gene, a strong positional and biological candidate for type 2 diabetes susceptibility. Diabetes52 :1300  to 1305,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text] Johnson GC, Esposito L, Barratt BJ, Smith AN, Heward J, Di Genova G, Ueda H, Cordell HJ, Eaves IA, Dudbridge F, Twells RC, Payne F, Hughes W, Nutland S, Stevens H, Carr P, Tuomilehto-Wolf E, Tuomilehto J, Gough SC, Clayton DG, Todd JA: Haplotype tagging for the identification of common disease genes. Nat Genet29 :233  to 237,2001[Medline] Prince JA, Feuk L, Gu HF, Gatz M, Blennow K, Brookes AJ: Genetic variation in a haplotype block spanning IDE, KNSL1 and HHEX influences Alzheimer s disease. Hum Mutat22 :363  to 371,2003[Medline] Patil N, Berno AJ, Hinds DA, Barrett WA, Doshi JM, Hacker CR, Kautzer CR, Lee DH, Marjoribanks C, McDonough DP, Nguyen BT, Norris MC, Sheehan JB, Shen N, Stern D, Stokowski RP, Thomas DJ, Trulson MO, Vyas KR, Frazer KA: Blocks of limited haplotype diversity revealed by high-resolution scanning of human chromosome 21. Science294 :1719  to 1723,2001[Abstract/Free Full Text] Horne BD, Camp NJ: Principal component analysis for selection of optimal SNP-sets that capture intragenic variation. Genet Epidemiol26 :11  to 21,2004[Medline] Carlsson S, Persson P-G, Grill V, Alvarsson M, Efendic S, Norman A, Svanstrom L, Ostenson C-G: Weight history, glucose tolerance and insulin levels in middle-aged Swedish men. Am J Epidemiology148 :539  to 545,1998[Abstract] Grill V, Persson G, Carlsson S, Norman A, Alvarsson M, Ostensson C-G, Svanstrom L, Efendic S: Family history of diabetes middle-aged Swedish men is a gender unrelated factor which associated with insulinopenia in newly diagnosed diabetic subjects. Diabetologia42 :15  to 23,1999 Agardh EE, Ahlbom A, Andersson T, Efendic S, Grill V, Hallqvist J, Norman A, Ostenson CG: Work stress and low sense of coherence is associated with type 2 diabetes in middle-aged Swedish women. Diabetes Care26 :719  to 724,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text] Zondervan KT, Cardon LR: The complex interplay among factors that influence allelic association. Nat Rev Genet5 :89  to 100,2004[Medline] O Donnell CJ, Lindpaintner K, Larson MG, Rao VS, Ordovas JM, Schaefer EJ, Myers RH, Levy D: Evidence for association and genetic linkage of the angiotensin-converting enzyme locus with hypertension and blood pressure in men but not women in the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation97 :1766  to 1772,1998[Abstract/Free Full Text] Wittrup HH, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Steffensen R, Deeb SS, Brunzell JD, Jensen G, Nordestgaard BG: Mutations in the lipoprotein lipase gene associated with ischemic heart disease in men: the Copenhagen city heart study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol19 :1535  to 1540,1999[Abstract/Free Full Text] McCarthy JJ, Meyer J, Moliterno DJ, Newby LK, Rogers WJ, Topol EJ: Evidence for substantial effect modification by gender in a large-scale genetic association study of the metabolic syndrome among coronary heart disease patients. Hum Genet114 :87  to 98,2003[Medline] Cox R, Bouzekri N, Martin S, Southam L, Hugill A, Golamaully M, Cooper R, Adeyemo A, Soubrier F, Ward R: Angiotensin-1-converting enzyme (ACE) plasma concentration is influenced by multiple ACE-linked quantitative trait nucleotides. Hum Mol Genet11 :2969  to 2977,2002[Abstract/Free Full Text] Despres JP, Lamarche B, Mauriege P, Cantin B, Lupien PJ, Dagenais GR: Risk factors for ischaemic heart disease: is it time to measure insulin? (Editorial). Eur Heart J17 :1453  to 1454,1996[Medline] Andersen UB, Olsen MH, Dige-Petersen H, Ibsen H: Exercise blood pressure is related to insulin resistance in subjects with two hypertensive parents. Blood Press12 :314  to 318,2003[Medline] Matthews DR, Rudenski AS, Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC: Homeostasis model assessment: insulin resistance and beta-cell function from fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in man. Diabetologia28 :412  to 419,1985[Medline] Jobs M, Howell WM, Stromqvist L, Mayr T, Brookes AJ: DASH-2: flexible, low-cost, and high-throughput SNP genotyping by dynamic allele-specific hybridization on membrane arrays. Genome Res13 :916  to 924,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text] Prince JA, Feuk L, Howell WM, Jobs M, Emahazion T, Blennow K, Brookes AJ: Robust and accurate single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping by dynamic allele-specific hybridization (DASH): design criteria and assay validation. Genome Res11 :152  to 162,2001[Abstract/Free Full Text] Niu T, Qin ZS, Xu X, Liu JS: Bayesian haplotype inference for multiple linked single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Am J Hum Genet70 :157  to 169,2002[Medline] Hill WG: Estimation of linkage disequilibrium in randomly mating populations. Heredity33 :229  to 239,1974[Medline]
