Increased Risk of Type 2 Diabetes in Alzheimer Disease Juliette Janson1,2, Thomas Laedtke1, Joseph E. Parisi2, Peter O Brien3, Ronald C. Petersen4, and Peter C. Butler5
1 Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 2 Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 3 Department of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 4 Department of Neurology and Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 5 Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes are characterized by increased prevalence with aging, a genetic predisposition, and comparable pathological features in the islet and brain (amyloid derived from amyloid ss protein in the brain in Alzheimer disease and islet amyloid derived from islet amyloid polypeptide in the pancreas in type 2 diabetes). Evidence is growing to link precursors of amyloid deposition in the brain and pancreas with the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes, respectively. Given these similarities, we questioned whether there may be a common underlying mechanism predisposing to islet and cerebral amyloid. To address this, we first examined the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in a community-based controlled study, the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer Disease Patient Registry (ADPR), which follows patients with Alzheimer disease versus control subjects without Alzheimer disease. In addition to this clinical study, we performed a pathological study of autopsy cases from this same community to determine whether there is an increased prevalence of islet amyloid in patients with Alzheimer disease and increased prevalence of cerebral amyloid in patients with type 2 diabetes. Patients who were enrolled in the ADPR (Alzheimer disease n = 100, non-Alzheimer disease control subjects n = 138) were classified according to fasting glucose concentration (FPG) as nondiabetic (FPG  < 110 mg/dl), impaired fasting glucose (IFG, FPG 110 to 125 mg/dl), and type 2 diabetes (FPG  > 126 mg/dl). The mean slope of FPG over 10 years in each case was also compared between Alzheimer disease and non-Alzheimer disease control subjects. Pancreas and brain were examined from autopsy specimens obtained from 105 humans (first, 28 cases of Alzheimer disease disease vs. 21 non-Alzheimer disease control subjects and, second, 35 subjects with type 2 diabetes vs. 21 non-type 2 diabetes control subjects) for the presence of islet and brain amyloid. Both type 2 diabetes (35% vs. 18%; P  <  0.05) and IFG (46% vs. 24%; P  <  0.01) were more prevalent in Alzheimer disease versus non-Alzheimer disease control subjects, so 81% of cases of Alzheimer disease had either type 2 diabetes or IFG. The slope of increase of FPG with age over 10 years was also greater in Alzheimer disease than non-Alzheimer disease control subjects (P  <  0.01). Islet amyloid was more frequent (P  <  0.05) and extensive (P  <  0.05) in patients with Alzheimer disease than in non-Alzheimer disease control subjects. However, diffuse and neuritic plaques were not more common in type 2 diabetes than in control subjects. In cases of type 2 diabetes when they were present, the duration of type 2 diabetes correlated with the density of diffuse (P  <  0.001) and neuritic plaques (P  <  0.01). In this community cohort from southeast Minnesota, type 2 diabetes and IFG are more common in patients with Alzheimer disease than in control subjects, as is the pathological hallmark of type 2 diabetes, islet amyloid. However, there was no increase in brain plaque formation in cases of type 2 diabetes, although when it was present, it correlated in extent with duration of diabetes. These data support the hypothesis that patients with Alzheimer disease are more vulnerable to type 2 diabetes and the possibility of linkage between the processes responsible for loss of brain cells and ss-cells in these diseases.
The islet of Langerhans in type 2 diabetes is characterized by ss-cell loss (1,2) and islet amyloid derived from islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) (3 to 5), a protein coexpressed and secreted with insulin by ss-cells. Brain dysfunction in Alzheimer disease is characterized by loss of neocortical neurons (6) and focal amyloid deposits, which consist of the locally expressed amyloid ss protein (AssP) (7 to 13). The prevalence of both Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes increases with age, and both have genetic components (14 to 19).
AssP and IAPP both spontaneously form into amyloid aggregates in an aqueous environment (7,8,20,21). The role of these aggregates of IAPP and AssP in ss-cell and cortical neuronal death in type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer disease is controversial. Small amyloid aggregates of either of these proteins are cytotoxic (22 to 25). The mechanism of the cytotoxicity mediated by small protein aggregates has been hypothesized to be by induction of membrane damage (25 to 27). In the case of IAPP, evidence exists to suggest that abnormal aggregation occurs initially intracellularly, and after cell death, IAPP-derived fibrils accumulate extracellularly (24,28,29). Similar mechanisms are also possible in Alzheimer disease. In vivo, even though IAPP and AssP are present in an aqueous environment, in health neither protein forms fibrils, suggesting that mechanisms exist to prevent this otherwise spontaneous process. These mechanisms likely include the chaperone protein pathway, a system for protein trafficking via intracellular binding proteins (chaperone proteins), which bind nascent proteins and facilitate their transport within the cell (30).
We have previously hypothesized that IAPP amyloid formation in type 2 diabetes may occur under circumstances of genetic variance, which results in a relative decreased affinity of the chaperone protein pathway for trafficking of IAPP (31). It is plausible that a low affinity for binding by one or more chaperone proteins to IAPP may be shared with a similar low affinity for binding to AssP. In support of this hypothesis, Schwartz (32) suggested that there might be a relationship between amyloid deposits in the brain and pancreatic islets.
We used both clinical studies (in living patients and community-based control subjects) and pathological studies to examine the existence of a shared risk for Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes. In the clinical studies, we took advantage of a unique community-based (Olmsted County, MN) cohort of well-characterized patients with Alzheimer disease and control subjects without Alzheimer disease (33) to address the question, "Is type 2 diabetes more common in Alzheimer disease?" In the pathology studies, we studied brain and pancreas in autopsy cases from the same community to address the hypotheses 1) that islet amyloid is more frequent in patients with Alzheimer disease than in control subjects without Alzheimer disease and 2) that amyloid deposits are more common in the brain in patients with type 2 diabetes than in nondiabetic humans.
   RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Clinical studies The primary objective of the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer Disease Patient Registry (ADPR) was to acquire a cohort of patients with Alzheimer disease and matched non-Alzheimer disease control subjects for assessment of the progression of Alzheimer disease clinically with respect to imaging and other neurological studies. Patients who were from southeastern Minnesota and had dementia were identified at the time of routine general medical examination in the Department of Community Internal Medicine at the Mayo Clinic. All studies were approved by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board. When there was a suspicion of Alzheimer disease during a routine periodic medical examination, a neurological evaluation that included the Mini-Mental State Exam, Geriatric Depression Scale, Hachinski Ischemic Scale, Short Test of Mental Status, Record of Independent Living, and extensive neuropsychological testing was performed (33). Age- and sex-matched control subjects were randomly identified from the same community clinics. All enrolled cases had detailed evaluation to confirm or rule out (control subjects) Alzheimer disease. Once a patient had been enrolled in the ADPR as a case of Alzheimer disease or as a control, he or she was followed annually for clinical studies that included a fasting blood glucose measurement. Recruitment to the ADPR was haphazard (i.e., not deliberately biased) with respect to the presence or absence of diabetes or the blood glucose concentration. Exclusion criteria were 1) chronic treatment with glucocorticoids, 2) a history of pancreatitis, or 3) type 1 diabetes. The distinction between type 1 and type 2 diabetes was made on conventional clinical criteria. The features favoring type 1 diabetes included lean BMI (and further weight loss) and young age at onset, insulin requirement at onset, documented ketoacidosis, presence of other autoimmune diseases, and a family history of autoimmune disease. Features favoring type 2 diabetes included strong family history, prolonged insulin-independent treatment, obesity, absence of autoimmune diseases, and later age of onset. It is acknowledged that the distinction between type 1 and type 2 diabetes is not without error, but in view of the large number of cases in the present studies and the high prevalence of type 2 versus type 1 diabetes, it is unlikely that the conclusions of the present studies have been influenced by erroneous inclusion of cases of type 1 diabetes (Table 1).
View this table:    TABLE 1 Study cases: clinical studies
  Protocol 1: is type 2 diabetes more common in Alzheimer disease? These recruitment criteria provided a total of 100 patients with Alzheimer disease and 138 non-Alzheimer disease control subjects. In protocol 1, these cases and control subjects were classified according to the criteria of the American Diabetes Association into one of three groups: nondiabetic ( <  110 mg/dl), impaired fasting glucose (IFG; 110 to 125 mg/dl), and type 2 diabetes ( > 126 mg/dl) based on the most recent glucose concentration measurements. Individuals who were taking blood glucose-lowering treatment for diabetes were classified as type 2 diabetes regardless of their most recent fasting glucose concentration.
Protocol 2: is the increase in fasting plasma glucose with age greater in Alzheimer disease? We also examined the changes in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) with aging in this cohort of patients. For each subject, we regressed the annual median FPG value against age. This was used to obtain a predicted FPG value for each subject at each decade and also to compare the slopes of the regression lines between groups (Alzheimer disease versus control subjects), using a two-sided rank sum test. To be included in this analysis, patients were required to have FPG values recorded that spanned at least 10 consecutive years from age 50 or greater and at least one value available for each calendar year. Ages of =" BORDER="0">50 years only were considered. These criteria resulted in a study population of 52 patients with Alzheimer disease and 105 non-Alzheimer disease control subjects.
Pathology studies Case recruitment. Alzheimer disease patients (group 1) and control subjects (non-Alzheimer disease; group 2) had been enrolled in the Mayo Clinic ADPR study during life (33). At death, non-Alzheimer disease and Alzheimer disease cases had an autopsy examination of the brain and the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease (or its absence) was confirmed using CERAD (Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer Disease) criteria (34). In the pathology study, we include 1) only cases with clinically and pathologically confirmed Alzheimer disease or non-Alzheimer disease, 2) cases with an autopsy including both brain and pancreas, and 3) cases with FPG documented at the Mayo Clinic within 2 years (Alzheimer disease 100%, non-Alzheimer disease 100%) and in most cases 1 year (non-Alzheimer disease 100%, Alzheimer disease 89% of complete autopsies) of death. A mean FPG value for each subject was the mean of at least two independent measurements. Alzheimer disease patients were sex- and age-matched with control subjects during life as per the Mayo Clinic ADPR study and were still matched for age at death (84  plus or minus  8 vs. 85  plus or minus  4 years, Alzheimer disease vs. non-Alzheimer disease; P = 0.7). Alzheimer disease was diagnosed 5.5  plus or minus  2.4 (range 1.3 to 9.9) years before death.
Type 2 diabetes cases (group 3; FPG  > 126 mg/dl) were identified via Mayo Clinic autopsy records. For inclusion they 1) had died in the 6 years preceding this study, 2) were also from Olmsted County, 3) had an autopsy including both brain and pancreas, and 4) had had a general medical examination performed including an FPG at Mayo Clinic during the year before death. Exclusion criteria included inadequate preservation of pancreatic tissue for anatomic study, type 1 diabetes, or secondary causes of diabetes. Diagnosis of diabetes in this cohort was 12  plus or minus  9 years before death. These selection criteria yielded 35 cases, but the mean age at death was younger in type 2 diabetes than the in Alzheimer disease cases (73  plus or minus  8 vs. 84  plus or minus  8 years; P  <  0.001). Therefore, identified from the Mayo Clinic autopsy records was an additional control group consisting of 21 cases (group 4) who were age, BMI, and sex matched with type 2 diabetic patients, had a normal FPG documented within 1 year before death, and were also meeting criteria 1 to 4 as for group 3. Groups 3 and 4 were included haphazardly (i.e., not consciously biased) with respect to the presence or absence of Alzheimer disease. The characteristics of each of these four study groups are summarized in Table 2.
View this table:    TABLE 2 Study cases: pathology
  Protocol 3: is islet amyloid increased in patients with Alzheimer disease? To address this question, we studied pancreas samples obtained at autopsy in 28 cases with Alzheimer disease and 21 without Alzheimer disease (groups 1 and 2 in Table 2). In addition, 35 cases with type 2 diabetes and 21 without type 2 diabetes were studied as a point of reference. Protocol 3 included a total of 105 cases.
Protocol 4: is brain amyloid more common in patients with type 2 diabetes? To address this question, we studied brain samples in 28 cases with and 19 without type 2 diabetes (groups 3 and 4 in Table 2). As a reference, 26 cases with Alzheimer disease and 19 without Alzheimer disease were studied. Some paraffin blocks of the superior/midfrontal gyrus were not available, resulting in 92 cases entering protocol 4.
Light microscopy. Pancreas and brain samples were obtained at autopsy from the four groups described above. Slides were examined blinded to the identity of the case by light microscopy.
Pancreas. Sequential sections obtained from paraffin-embedded pancreas tail samples were stained with hematoxylin/eosin and Congo red and by immunostaining for insulin (29). The nature of pink amyloid deposits in Congo red-stained slides was confirmed by green/orange birefringence under polarized light. At least 25 islets per specimen were scored for presence and extent of islet amyloid. The extent of amyloid deposition was classified per islet on a scale from 0 to 4, with 0 = no deposits, 1 = one deposit, 2 = a few small deposits, 3 = major deposition, and 4 = just a few endocrine cells left between confluent deposits.
Brain. Samples of the superior/midfrontal gyrus were collected, and the density of neuritic and diffuse plaques and neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) was determined. For visualizing neurofilaments, paraffin sections of the superior/midfrontal gyrus were stained with a modified Bielschowsky s technique. Per sample, the number of neuritic plaques, diffuse plagues, and NFT was determined in five microscope fields of 2 mm2 each.
Statistical analysis Protocols 1 and 2. A rank sum test was used to compare age, and 2 tests were used to compare number in groups according to classification for sex and diabetic, nondiabetic, or IFG status. A two-sided rank sum test was used to compare slope of fasting glucose versus age.
Protocols 3 and 4. An unpaired two-tailed Student s t test was used to compare age and BMI between groups. The nonparametric Mann-Whitney test was used to compare the frequency and extent of islet amyloid; FPG; and density of neuritic plaques, diffuse plagues, and NFT among groups. The 2 test was used to compare the number of Alzheimer disease and non-Alzheimer disease subjects with type 2 diabetes. Spearman rank correlations were used to examine relationships among diffuse plagues, neuritic plaques, and NFT density versus duration of diabetes before death and age at death in type 2 diabetes.
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Clinical studies: prevalence of type 2 diabetes and IFG in the living cohort of Alzheimer disease versus non-Alzheimer disease control subjects and trend of FPG with aging Protocol 1. There was no difference in age or sex distribution between the Alzheimer disease and non-Alzheimer disease control group (Table 1). BMI was slightly but not significantly higher in control subjects versus Alzheimer disease. The prevalence of both type 2 diabetes (34.6 vs. 18.1%; P  <  0.05) and IFG (46.2 vs. 23.8%; P  <  0.01) was greater in the Alzheimer disease versus the non-Alzheimer disease control group (Fig. 1); 81% of the Alzheimer disease cases therefore had either type 2 diabetes or IFG.
View larger version (16K):    FIG. 1. Protocol 1: the prevalence of diabetes and IFG in the Olmsted County community-based cohort of cases of Alzheimer disease (AD) and control subjects (non-Alzheimer disease [non-AD]; top). Protocol 2: the slope of FPG concentration versus age in the same cohort (bottom). TTDM, type 2 diabetes.
  Protocol 2. When the trend of FPG with aging was examined, there was a gradual increase with aging in both groups (P  <  0.01 vs. no change). However, the Alzheimer disease group had a greater increase per year compared with non-Alzheimer disease control subjects (0.83 vs. 0.57 mg   dl-1   y-1; P  <  0.01; Fig. 1). This greater rate of increase of blood glucose was preserved in Alzheimer disease when cases with diabetes were excluded from the analysis.
Pathology studies: islet amyloid in Alzheimer disease (protocol 3) and brain amyloid in type 2 diabetes (protocol 4) Protocol 3: islet amyloid in Alzheimer disease. Both the frequency and the extent of islet amyloid were higher in the Alzheimer disease group versus the non-Alzheimer disease group (both P  <  0.05; Fig. 2) despite a trend toward a lower BMI in Alzheimer disease (24.3  plus or minus  3.4 vs. 27.1  plus or minus  6.7 kg/m2 Alzheimer disease vs. non-Alzheimer disease; P = 0.06). As expected, the frequency and the extent of islet amyloid was greater in type 2 diabetes (group 3) versus non-type 2 diabetes (group 4; P  <  0.001; Fig. 2).
View larger version (14K):    FIG. 2. Protocol 3: frequency of islet amyloid (top) and extent of islet amyloid (bottom) in patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) and control subjects (non-Alzheimer disease [non-AD]) and in patients with type 2 diabetes (TTDM) and their control group (non-TTDM). Individual values ( ) and medians (line).
  Inclusion of cases in this autopsy protocol was blinded with respect to the presence or absence of diabetes but with the requirement that FPG be documented. Subsequent analysis of the FPG concentrations revealed that the prevalence of type 2 diabetes (FPG  > 126 mg/dl) in the Alzheimer disease group was 32% and in non-Alzheimer disease cases was 14% (P = 0.15). The mean FPG in Alzheimer disease was not higher than in control subjects (126  plus or minus  8 vs. 110  plus or minus  6 mg/dl; P = 0.09).
Protocol 4: brain amyloid in type 2 diabetes. The density of diffuse or neuritic plaques or NFT was not different between patients with type 2 diabetes versus nondiabetic control subjects (P = 0.07, P = 0.3, and P = 0.4, respectively; Table 3). As expected, the density of neuritic plaques, diffuse plaques, and NFT was greater (P  <  0.05) in Alzheimer disease cases (group 1) versus non-Alzheimer disease (group 2).
View this table:    TABLE 3 Brain pathology
  In 22 of 28 type 2 diabetes cases, the year of diagnosis of diabetes was documented. Diffuse plaques were detected in 12 and neuritic plaques in 7 of these 22 cases of type 2 diabetes with a documented age of onset of diabetes. There was a positive relationship between duration of known diabetes and the extent of diffuse plaques (rs = 0.8, P  <  0.001) or neuritic plaques (rs = 0.9, P  <  0.01) in these cases (Fig. 3). In contrast, in neither type 2 diabetes nor non-type 2 diabetes was there a correlation with the density of either of these plaques and the age at death.
View larger version (12K):    FIG. 3. Protocol 4: relationship between the density of diffuse plaques (rs = 0.8, P  <  0.001; top) or neuritic plaques (rs = 0.9, P  <  0.01; bottom) versus the duration of diabetes in patients with type 2 diabetes. Cases were included only when the duration of diabetes was documented and the respective plaque type was detected (y did not equal zero).
     DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   We report that the prevalence of both type 2 diabetes and IFG are increased in a well-characterized community cohort of patients with Alzheimer disease from southeast Minnesota. In the related pathology studies, we also report an increased frequency of islet amyloid in patients with Alzheimer disease. However, brain amyloid was not increased in patients with type 2 diabetes versus non-type 2 diabetes, but the density of diffuse and neuritic plaques, when present, was associated with the duration of diabetes.
The studies were initially undertaken to test the hypothesis that there may be a shared predisposition for development of islet amyloid and brain amyloid in patients with Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes, respectively. This postulate arose from the close resemblance in pathology in the brain in Alzheimer disease and islets in type 2 diabetes. In both diseases, a locally expressed protein (AssP in Alzheimer disease and IAPP in type 2 diabetes) is deposited in amyloid deposits with a gradual decline in the number of cells of the respective proteins. Amyloid deposits of both AssP and IAPP (or more likely their oligomeric precursors) are cytotoxic (22,23,35 to 40) by a mechanism that may relate to membrane disruption (25 to 27). However, as yet, there is still no clear explanation for why these amyloidogenic proteins form amyloid fibrils in those who develop type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer disease. Because both of these proteins spontaneously form amyloid fibrils in vitro in the aqueous environment present in the cell, mechanisms must exist in health to prevent this aggregation, which presumably include the chaperone protein pathway (30). All newly synthesized proteins are bound by a chaperone protein that has the function of preventing insoluble proteins (e.g., IAPP and AssP) from aggregating in cells and trafficking the protein to its appropriate subcellular location. Chaperon proteins have been described as promiscuous because each chaperone protein binds and traffics numerous different proteins with structurally similar properties (30). As individual chaperone proteins traffic structurally similar peptides, it is possible that IAPP and AssP share one or more chaperone proteins. In Fig. 4, the amino acid sequence and structural properties of each amino acid of IAPP1 to 37 and AssP1 to 42 are shown. They have been aligned to reveal the major overlap (90%) in structural properties of IAPP20 to 28 and AssP25 to 33, areas that are hydrophobic and therefore likely to be a target for binding by chaperone proteins. Furthermore, this region of IAPP is well-established as the amyloidogenic sequence (36) and AssP25 to 35 is neurotoxic (41). Recently it has been suggested that the toxic intermediate form of IAPP and AssP oligomers are recognized by the same antibody, suggesting a strong structural relationship (42).
View larger version (13K):    FIG. 4. The structural overlap between IAPP and AssP. There is a major overlap (90%) in the structural properties of IAPP20 to 28 and AssP25 to 33 when the amino acids are classified as acidic (A), basic (B), nonpolar (NP), and polar uncharged (Pu). Gray boxed and hatched areas are identical amino acids; gray boxed areas are amino acids with similar structural properties.
  If the chaperone protein pathway for trafficking AssP or IAPP is shared, then any decreased capacity for trafficking of either might also be shared. Under these circumstances, aggregation of either or both proteins might occur, resulting in the development of the relevant phenotype for Alzheimer disease and/or type 2 diabetes. In addition, type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer disease increase in prevalence with aging, and cell chaperone protein capacity declines with aging (43), which would be expected to reveal any partial deficiency in chaperone capacity with aging. Therefore, one potential explanation for the reported shared risk for Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes and similar pathology is that IAPP and AssP share one or more chaperone proteins and that a functional defect in this shared pathway (decreased chaperone protein binding, decreased chaperone protein availability) results in a shared vulnerability for AssP to aggregate in ss-pleated sheets in cortical cells and IAPP to aggregate in ss-cells.
An alternative hypothesis to account for the reported overlap between islet amyloid and brain amyloid is that subtle hyperglycemia causes Alzheimer disease. This possibility has been reviewed by Finch and Cohen (44). Finch and Cohen proposed that the progressive increase in plasma glucose concentration that occurs with aging in the general population may be important in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. They proposed that this may be mediated by induction of oxidative stress or by glycosylation of key regulatory proteins (45,46). The current study was at least partly supportive of this interesting hypothesis. When present, the density of diffuse and neuritic plaques in brain increased with the duration of diabetes but not with age. Prolonged exposure to hyperglycemia thus might trigger brain plaque formation in those at risk. However, against this hypothesis, there was not an overall increase in the pathological features of Alzheimer disease in cases of type 2 diabetes compared with control subjects, consistent with a previous pathological report (47).
The high risk of underlying vascular disease in diabetes has been reported to increase rates of vascular dementia in diabetes (48,49). Furthermore, hypertension and hyperlipidemia, both strongly associated with diabetes (50), both are risk factors for vascular dementia (51 to 54). Another potential mechanism for decreased cognitive function in long-standing diabetes is recurrent hypoglycemia (55 to 57). However, in the present studies, we included only cases with type 2 diabetes in which recurrent hypoglycemia is rare in comparison with type 1 diabetes.
These multiple factors that might influence a relationship between dementia and type 2 diabetes as well as differences in populations and inclusion criteria likely contribute to the conflicting epidemiological data in this field. Some studies suggest that the prevalence of Alzheimer disease is increased in type 2 diabetes (58 to 60), whereas in others, it has been reported as decreased (61 to 66) or comparable (48,49,67 to 71). A confounding factor in these studies (including the current one) is that Alzheimer disease is often accompanied by a decreased BMI presumed to be a result of decreased food intake. Because the most potent risk factor for development of type 2 diabetes is an increased BMI, it is possible that an association between these conditions has been obscured by the relative protective effect of a decreased BMI in Alzheimer disease. Alternatively, it is possible that people with Alzheimer disease exercise less and therefore have decreased insulin sensitivity and increased risk for type 2 diabetes. As type 2 diabetes tends to develop at a younger age than Alzheimer disease and is associated with a decreased life expectancy, early death from complications of diabetes might obscure subsequent development of Alzheimer disease. The current pathology studies are unique inasmuch as the Alzheimer disease and non-Alzheimer disease groups were fully characterized both in life and by autopsy, and so although the numbers are small, it is provocative that there is a distinct increase in risk of islet amyloid in patients with Alzheimer disease despite a lower BMI. The clinical data (protocols 1 and 2) are also community-based cases that have been defined extensively with respect to the presence or absence of dementia and followed over a relatively long term (33). It is of interest that a population-based study from the same region showed an association between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer disease (59). Whereas the former study examined records of all known cases of type 2 diabetes in the Rochester area at the time of the study for a diagnosis of dementia and Alzheimer disease (1,455 cases), the present study was focused on a much smaller cohort of patients with Alzheimer disease (100 cases) and control subjects (138 cases) enrolled in the ADPR (33), wherein the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease was rigorously established, and then the same patients were followed annually in the study thereafter and when deceased were included in the autopsy studies. One other factor that might have caused discrepancies between reported studies is the changing definition of diabetes. The present study uses the criteria adopted for FPG concentrations in 1997 by an expert committee convened by the American Diabetes Association (72). As a consequence of this report, the plasma glucose concentration required to establish the diagnosis of diabetes was decreased from 140 mg/dl to 126 mg/dl. Furthermore, a high-risk group was established for the subsequent development of diabetes with an FPG concentration of 110 to 125 mg/dl. Studies that used the higher values for diagnosis of diabetes would report lower prevalence rates in both Alzheimer disease and control subjects and possibly not observe differences between groups that might be evident with the criteria used here.
Another potential confounding factor in previous as well as the present studies is recruitment bias. All studies performed at major tertiary referral centers such as the Mayo Clinic are subject to such bias. Efforts were made to minimize this in the present clinical studies by recruitment of patients from the local community from the community clinics of the Mayo Medical Center. Patients were therefore attending the Mayo Clinic community clinics for primary care when they were recruited for either the Alzheimer disease or control groups of the clinical studies. Nonetheless, other recruitment bias may be introduced in a study such as ours by the failure of affected patients to seek medical care and therefore be unavailable for consideration. In the present study, there is a greater proportion of women than men in the clinical studies, which might be in part a reflection of recruitment bias but also potentially be due to the shorter life span of men than women once Alzheimer disease is diagnosed. Autopsy studies of Alzheimer disease cases and control subjects (for islet amyloid) would be subject to the same ascertainment bias as the ADPR since the cases were in the ADPR until death. In autopsy studies of type 2 diabetes cases versus control subjects for brain amyloid, we sought to minimize deliberate bias by including most recent autopsies in reverse sequence from cases that were appropriate for inclusion for these criteria. People who have an autopsy are of course in themselves a subgroup of the general population, so bias has to be considered. Notwithstanding these limitations, we do have the opportunity of presenting autopsy data from cases that were well characterized in life compared with most autopsy studies.
In conclusion, we report that there is an increased prevalence of both type 2 diabetes and IFG in a community cohort of patients with Alzheimer disease followed in Olmsted County, Rochester, Minnesota. We also report increased islet amyloid in patients with Alzheimer disease compared with control subjects. However, we did not observe an increased frequency of brain amyloid in cases of type 2 diabetes, although in cases of type 2 diabetes that did have brain amyloid, the extent of this amyloid increased with longer duration of diabetes, a correlate that did not extend to the age of patients with type 2 diabetes. Taken together, these clinical and pathological studies support a possible link between the neurodegenerative processes that lead to loss of cortical brain cells in Alzheimer disease and the loss of ss-cells in type 2 diabetes.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   This study was funded by grants from the National Institute on Aging, the Mayo ADPR (AG 06786), the Mayo Alzheimer Disease Research Center (AG 16574 to J.E.P. and R.C.P. and DK59579 to P.C.B.), and the Larry Hillblom Foundation (to P.C.B.).
We acknowledge the excellent technical assistance of Jane Kahl and Karen Laakso, the staff of the Mayo Alzheimer Disease Research Center, and the excellent editorial assistance of Kim Denkers. We thank Robert Rizza for suggestions and support.
   FOOTNOTES   R.C.P. is on an advisory panel for Elam Pharmaceuticals; has received honoraria from Pfizer, Eisai, Novartis, and Janssen; and has received grant/research support from the National Institute on Aging, Pfizer, and Eisai.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Peter C. Butler, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1333 San Pablo Street, BMT-B11, Los Angeles, CA 90033. E-mail: pbutler{at}usc.edu
Received for publication August 13, 2003 and accepted in revised form October 27, 2003
AssP, amyloid ss protein; ADPR, Alzheimer Disease Patient Registry; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; IAPP, islet amyloid polypeptide; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; NFT, neurofibrillary tangle
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Westermark P, Wilander E: The influence of amyloid deposits on the islet volume in maturity onset diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia15 :417  to 421,1978[Medline] Clark A, Wells CA, Buley ID, Cruickshank JK, Vanhegan RI, Matthews DR, Cooper GJ, Holman RR, Turner RC: Islet amyloid, increased A-cells, reduced B-cells and exocrine fibrosis: quantitative changes in the pancreas in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res9 :151  to 159,1988[Medline] Cooper GJ, Willis AC, Clark A, Turner RC, Sim RB, Reid KB: Purification and characterization of a peptide from amyloid-rich pancreases of type 2 diabetic patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A84 :8628  to 8632,1987[Abstract] Westermark P, Wernstedt C, Wilander E, Hayden DW, O Brien TD, Johnson KH: Amyloid fibrils in human insulinoma and islets of Langerhans of the diabetic cat are derived from a neuropeptide-like protein also present in normal islet cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A84 :3881  to 3885,1987[Abstract] Johnson KH, O Brien TD, Hayden DW, Jordan K, Ghobrial HK, Mahoney WC, Westermark P: Immunolocalization of islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) in pancreatic beta cells by means of peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) and protein A-gold techniques. Am J Pathol130 :1  to 8,1988[Abstract] Braak H, Braak E: The human entorhinal cortex: normal morphology and lamina-specific pathology in various diseases. Neurosci Res15 :6  to 31,1992[Medline] Glenner GG, Wong CW: Alzheimer disease: initial report of the purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun120 :885  to 890,1984[Medline] Masters CL, Simms G, Weinman NA, Multhaup G, McDonald BL, Beyreuther K: Amyloid plaque core protein in Alzheimer disease and Down syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A82 :4245  to 4249,1985[Abstract] Masters CL, Multhaup G, Simms G, Pottgiesser J, Martins RN, Beyreuther K: Neuronal origin of a cerebral amyloid: neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease contain the same protein as the amyloid of plaque cores and blood vessels. EMBO J4 :2757  to 2763,1985[Abstract] Bahmanyar S, Higgins GA, Goldgaber D, Lewis DA, Morrison JH, Wilson MC, Shankar SK, Gajdusek DC: Localization of amyloid beta protein messenger RNA in brains from patients with Alzheimer disease. Science237 :77  to 80,1987[Medline] Goedert M: Neuronal localization of amyloid beta protein precursor mRNA in normal human brain and in Alzheimer disease. EMBO J6 :3627  to 3632,1987[Abstract] Card JP, Meade RP, Davis LG: Immunocytochemical localization of the precursor protein for beta-amyloid in the rat central nervous system. Neuron1 :835  to 846,1988[Medline] Shivers BD, Hilbich C, Multhaup G, Salbaum M, Beyreuther K, Seeburg PH: Alzheimer disease amyloidogenic glycoprotein: expression pattern in rat brain suggests a role in cell contact. EMBO J7 :1365  to 1370,1988[Abstract] Van Broeckhoven C, Genthe AM, Vandenberghe A, Horsthemke B, Backhovens H, Raeymaekers P, Van Hul W, Wehnert A, Gheuens J, Cras P, et al: Failure of familial Alzheimer disease to segregate with the A4-amyloid gene in several European families. Nature329 :153  to 155,1987[Medline] Tanzi RE, St George-Hyslop PH, Haines JL, Polinsky RJ, Nee L, Foncin JF, Neve RL, McClatchey AI, Conneally PM, Gusella JF: The genetic defect in familial Alzheimer disease is not tightly linked to the amyloid beta-protein gene. Nature329 :156  to 157,1987[Medline] St George-Hyslop PH, Haines JL, Farrer LA, Polinsky R, Van Broeckhoven C, Goate A, McLachlan DR, Orr H, Bruni AC, Sorbi S, et al: Genetic linkage studies suggest that Alzheimer disease is not a single homogeneous disorder: FAD Collaborative Study Group. Nature347 :194  to 197,1990[Medline] Wilson PW, Anderson KM, Kannel WB: Epidemiology of diabetes mellitus in the elderly: the Framingham Study. Am J Med80(5A) :3  to 9,1986 Barnett AH, Eff C, Leslie RD, Pyke DA: Diabetes in identical twins: a study of 200 pairs. Diabetologia20 :87  to 93,1981[Medline] Newman B, Selby JV, King MC, Slemenda C, Fabsitz R, Friedman GD: Concordance for type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus in male twins. Diabetologia30 :763  to 768,1987[Medline] Hilbich C, Kisters-Woike B, Reed J, Masters CL, Beyreuther K: Aggregation and secondary structure of synthetic amyloid beta A4 peptides of Alzheimer disease. J Mol Biol218 :149  to 163,1991[Medline] Glenner GG, Eanes ED, Wiley CA: Amyloid fibrils formed from a segment of the pancreatic islet amyloid protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun155 :608  to 614,1988[Medline] Lorenzo A, Razzaboni B, Weir GC, Yankner BA: Pancreatic islet cell toxicity of amylin associated with type-2 diabetes mellitus. Nature368 :756  to 760,1994[Medline] Schubert D, Behl C, Lesley R, Brack A, Dargusch R, Sagara Y, Kimura H: Amyloid peptides are toxic via a common oxidative mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A92 :1989  to 1993,1995[Abstract] O Brien TD, Butler PC, Kreutter DK, Kane LA, Eberhardt NL: Human islet amyloid polypeptide expression in COS-1 cells: a model of intracellular amyloidogenesis. Am J Pathol147 :609  to 616,1995[Abstract] Janson J, Ashley RH, Harrison D, McIntyre S, Butler PC: The mechanism of islet amyloid polypeptide toxicity is membrane disruption by intermediate-sized toxic amyloid particles. Diabetes48 :491  to 498,1999[Abstract] Mirzabekov TA, Lin MC, Kagan BL: Pore formation by the cytotoxic islet amyloid peptide amylin. J Biol Chem271 :1988  to 1992,1996[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lashuel HA, Hartley D, Petre BM, Waltz T, Lansbury PT: Neurodegenerative disease: amyloid pores from pathogenic mutations. Nature418 :291 ,2002 Couce M, Kane LA, O Brien TD, Charlesworth J, Soeller W, McNeish J, Kreutter D, Roche P, Butler PC: Treatment with growth hormone and dexamethasone in mice transgenic for human islet amyloid polypeptide causes islet amyloidosis and ss-cell dysfunction. Diabetes45 :1094  to 1101,1996[Abstract] O Brien TD, Butler AE, Roche PC, Johnson KH, Butler PC: Islet amyloid polypeptide in human insulinomas: evidence for intracellular amyloidogenesis. Diabetes43 :329  to 336,1994[Abstract] Craig EA, Weissman JS, Horwich AL: Heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones: mediators of protein conformation and turnover in the cell. Cell78 :365  to 372,1994[Medline] Butler PC, Eberhardt NL, O Brien TD. Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) and insulin secretion. In Molecular Biology of Diabetes. Draznin B, LeRoith D, Eds. Totowa, NJ, Humana Press,1994 , p.381  to 398 Schwartz P: Senile cerebral, pancreatic insular and cardiac amyloidosis. Trans N Y Acad Sci27 :393  to 413,1965[Medline] Petersen RC, Kokmen E, Tangalos E, Ivnik RJ, Kurland LT: Mayo Clinic Alzheimer disease patient registry. Aging2 :408  to 415,1990[Medline] Gearing M, Mirra SS, Hedreen JC, Sumi SM, Hansen LA, Heyman A: The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer Disease (CERAD): Part X. Neuropathology confirmation of the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. Neurology45 :461  to 466,1995[Abstract] Betsholtz C, Christmansson L, Engstrom U, Rorsman F, Svensson V, Johnson KH, Westermark P: Sequence divergence in a specific region of islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) explains differences in islet amyloid formation between species. FEBS Lett251 :261  to 264,1989[Medline] Westermark P, Engstrom U, Johnson KH, Westermark GT, Betsholtz C: Islet amyloid polypeptide: pinpointing amino acid residues linked to amyloid fibril formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A87 :5036  to 5040,1990[Abstract] Zhang S, Liu J, Saafi EL, Cooper GJ: Induction of apoptosis by human amylin in RINm5F islet beta-cells is associated with enhanced expression of p53 and p21WAF1/CIP1. FEBS Lett455 :315  to 320,1999[Medline] Zhang S, Liu J, MacGibbon G, Dragunow M, Cooper GJ: Increased expression and activation of c-Jun contributes to human amylin-induced apoptosis in pancreatic islet beta-cells. J Mol Biol324 :271  to 285,2002[Medline] Bai JZ, Saafi EL, Shang S, Cooper GJ: Role of Ca2+ in apoptosis evoked by human amylin in pancreatic islet beta-cells. Biochem J343 :53  to 61,1999[Medline] Tucker HM, Rydel RE, Wright S, Estus S: Human amylin induces "apoptotic" pattern of gene expression concomitant with cortical neuronal apoptosis. J Neurochem71 :506  to 516,1998[Medline] Laczko I, Holly S, Konya Z, Soos K, Varga J, Hollosi M, Penke B: Conformational mapping of amyloid peptides from the putative neurotoxic 25 to 35 region. Biochem Biophys Res Commun205 :120  to 126,1994[Medline] Kayed R, Head E, Thompson JL, McIntire TM, Milton SC, Glabe CG: Common structure of soluble amyloid oligomers implies common mechanism of pathogenesis. Science300 :486  to 489,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text] Blake MJ, Edelsman R, Feulner GJ, Nortone DD, Holbrook NJ: Stress-induced heat shock protein 70 expression in adrenal cortex: an adrenocorticotropic hormone-sensitive, age-dependent response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A88 :9873  to 9877,1991[Abstract] Finch CE, Cohen DM: Aging, metabolism, and Alzheimer disease: review and hypothesis. Exp Neurol143 :82  to 102,1997[Medline] Yan SD, Stern D, Schmidt AM: What s the rage? The receptor for advanced glycation and end products (RAGE) and the dark side of glucose. Eur J Clin Invest27 :179  to 181,1997[Medline] Sasaki N, Toki S, Chowei H, Saito T, Nakao N, Hayashi Y, Takeuchi M, Makita Z: Immunohistochemical distribution of the receptor for advanced glycation end products in neurons and astrocytes in Alzheimer disease. Brain Res888 :256  to 262,2001[Medline] Heitner J, Dickson D: Diabetics do not have increased Alzheimer-type pathology with age-matched control subjects: a retrospective postmortem immunocytochemical and histofluorescent study. Neurology49 :1306  to 1311,1997[Abstract] Curb JD, Rodriguez BL, Abbott RD, Petrovitch H, Ross GW, Masaki KH, Foley D, Blanchette PL, Harris T, Chen R, White LR: Longitudinal association of vascular and Alzheimer dementias, diabetes, and glucose tolerance. Neurology52 :971  to 975,1999[Abstract/Free Full Text] MacKight C, Rockwood K, Awalt E, McDowell I: Diabetes mellitus and the risk of dementia, Alzheimer disease and vascular cognitive impairment in the Canadian study of health and aging. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord14 :77  to 83,2002[Medline] Isomaa B, Almgren P, Tuomi T, Forsen B, Lahti K, Nissen M, Taskinen M-R, Groop L: Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality associated with the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes Care24 :683  to 689,2001[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sasaki N, Fukatsu R, Tsuzuki K, Hayashi Y, Yoshida T, Fujii N, Koike T, Wakayama I, Yanagihara R, Garruto R, Amano N, Makita Z: Advanced glycation end products in Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Am J Pathol153 :1149  to 1155,1998[Abstract/Free Full Text] Mast H, Thompson JL, Lee SH, Mohr JP, Sacco RL: Hypertension and diabetes mellitus as determinants of multiple lacunar infarcts. Stroke26 :30  to 33,1995[Abstract/Free Full Text] Tatemichi TK, Desmond DW, Paik M, Figueroa M, Gropen TI, Stern Y, Sano M, Remien R, Williams JB, Mohr JP, et al.: Clinical determinants of dementia related to stroke. Ann Neurol33 :568  to 575,1993[Medline] Desmond DW, Tatemichi TK, Paik M, Stern Y: Risk factors for cerebrovascular disease as correlates of cognitive function in a stroke-free cohort. Arch Neurol50 :162  to 166,1993[Abstract] McCall AL: The impact of diabetes on the NCS. Diabetes41 :557  to 570,1992[Abstract] Biessels GJ, Kappelle AC, Bravenboer B, Erkelens DW, Gibsen WH: Cerebral function in diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia37 :643  to 650,1994[Medline] Langen SJ, Deary IJ, Hepburn DA, Frier BM: Cumulative cognitive impairment following recurrent severe hypoglycaemia in adult patients with insulin-treated diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia34 :337  to 344,1991[Medline] Ott A, Stolk RP, van Harskamp F, Pols H, Hofman A, Breteler M: Diabetes mellitus and the risk of dementia: the Rotterdam study. Neurology53 :1937  to 1942,1999[Abstract/Free Full Text] Leibson CL, Rocca WA, Hanson VA, Cha R, Kokmen E, O Brien PC, Palumbo PJ: The risk of dementia among persons with diabetes mellitus: a population based cohort study. Am J Epidemiol145 :301  to 308,1997[Abstract] Luchsinger JA, Tang M-X, Yaakov S, Shea S, Mayeux R: Diabetes mellitus and risk of Alzheimer disease and dementia with stroke in a multiethnic cohort. Am J Epidemiol154 :635  to 641,2001[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bucht G, Adolfsson R, Lithner F, Winblad B: Changes in blood glucose and insulin secretion in patients with senile dementia of Alzheimer type. Acta Med Scand213 :387  to 392,1983[Medline] Wolf-Klein GP, Silversone FA, Brod MS, Levy A, Foley CJ, Termotto V, Breuer J: Are Alzheimer patients healthier? J Am Geriatr Soc36 :219  to 224,1988[Medline] Ferini-Strambi L, Smirne S, Garanchini P, Pinto P, Franceschi M: Clinical and epidemiological aspects of Alzheimer disease with presenile onset: a case control study. Neuroepidemiology9 :39  to 49,1990[Medline] Landin K, Blennow K, Wallin A, Gottfries C-G: Low blood pressure and blood glucose levels in Alzheimer disease: evidence for a hypometabolic disorder? J Intern Med233 :357  to 363,1993[Medline] Mortel KF, Wood S, Pavol MA, Meyer JS, Rexer JL: Analysis of familial and individual risk factors among patients with ischemic vascular dementia and Alzheimer disease. Angiology44 :599  to 605,1993[Medline] Neilson KA, Nolan JH, Berchtold NC, Sandman CA, Mulnard RA, Cotman CW: Apolipoprotein-E genotyping of diabetic dementia patients: is diabetes rare in Alzheimer disease? J Am Geriatr Soc44 :1  to 8,1996[Medline] Heyman A, Wilkinson WE, Stafford JA, Helms MJ, Sigmon AH, Weinberg T: Alzheimer disease: a study of epidemiological aspects. Ann Neurol15 :335  to 341,1984[Medline] Broe GA, Henderson AS, Creasey H, McCusker E, Korten AE, Jorm AF, Longley W, Anthony JC: A case controlled study of Alzheimer disease in Australia. Neurology40 :1698  to 1707,1990[Abstract] Kokmen E, Beard CM, Chandra V, Offord KP, Schoenberg BS, Ballard DJ: Clinical risk factors for Alzheimer disease: a population based case-control study. Neurology41 :1393  to 1397,1991[Abstract] Thorpe J, Widman LP, Wallin A, Beiswanger J, Blumenthal HT: Comorbidity of other chronic age-dependent diseases in dementia. Aging Clin Exp Res6 :159  to 166,1994 Curb JD, Roderiquez BL, Petrovich H, Masaki KH, Burchfiel CM, Ross W, Chen R, Harris T, White LR: The relationship of diabetes and glucose tolerance to Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia (Abstract 488). Neurobiol Aging17 (Suppl.) :S122 ,1996 The expert committee on the diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care20 :1183  to 1197,1997[Medline]
