An Insulin-Degrading Enzyme Inhibitor Decreases Amylin Degradation, Increases Amylin-Induced Cytotoxicity, and Increases Amyloid Formation in Insulinoma Cell Cultures Robert G. Bennett1,2, Frederick G. Hamel1,2, and William C. Duckworth3,4,5
1 Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 2 Department of Medical Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 3 Endocrinology Section, Carl T. Hayden VA Medical Center, Phoenix, Arizona 4 Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 5 Department of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Amylin (islet amyloid polypeptide) is the chief component of the islet amyloid found in type 2 diabetes, and amylin fibril precursors may be cytotoxic to pancreatic ss-cells. Little is known about the prevention of amylin aggregation. We investigated the role of insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) in amylin degradation, amyloid deposition, and cytotoxicity in RIN-m5F insulinoma cells. Human 125I-labeled amylin degradation was inhibited by 46 and 65% with the addition of 100 nmol/l human amylin or insulin, respectively. 125I-labeled insulin degradation was inhibited with 100 nmol/l human amylin, rat amylin, and insulin (by 50, 50, and 73%, respectively). The IDE inhibitor bacitracin inhibited amylin degradation by 78% and insulin degradation by 100%. Amyloid staining by Congo red fluorescence was detectable at 100 nmol/l amylin and was pronounced at 1,000 nmol/l amylin treatment for 48 h. Bacitracin treatment markedly increased staining at all amylin concentrations. Bacitracin with amylin caused a dramatic decrease in cell viability compared with amylin alone (68 and 25%, respectively, at 10 nmol/l amylin). In summary, RIN-m5F cells degraded both amylin and insulin through a common proteolytic pathway. IDE inhibition by bacitracin impaired amylin degradation, increased amyloid formation, and increased amylin-induced cytotoxicity, suggesting a role for IDE in amylin clearance and the prevention of amylin aggregation.
Type 2 diabetes is characterized by the loss of pancreatic ss-cell mass, accompanied by the presence of islet amyloid deposits in the pancreas (1). The major component of islet amyloid is amylin (also known as islet amyloid polypeptide), a polypeptide copackaged and cosecreted with insulin by pancreatic ss-cells (2). It is presently unclear whether islet amyloid merely is a consequence of diabetes or actually contributes to the progression of the disease. However, there is evidence that intermediate precursors of amylin fibrils are cytotoxic to ss-cells, whereas mature amyloid fibrils are not toxic, suggesting that ss-cell toxicity may precede deposition of islet amyloid (3,4). Because amylin is continually produced in individuals without type 2 diabetes, the mere presence of amylin is insufficient to induce amylin-induced ss-cell toxicity and islet amyloid. Transgenic animals producing human (amyloidogenic) amylin fail to develop islet amyloid (5 to 7), but when additional diabetic traits are introduced, islet amyloid is detected (8 to 10). Therefore, there is a protective mechanism that prevents amyloid deposition under normal conditions, but is impaired under diabetic conditions. Because proteolysis is a major pathway in the regulation of protein levels, degradation of amylin may contribute to the prevention of islet amyloid aggregation. ss-cell toxicity and islet amyloid may therefore result from an imbalance in amylin levels because of impaired degradation of amylin. At present, our understanding of the proteolytic pathways that contribute to the degradation of amylin is incomplete.
The enzyme responsible for the cellular proteolysis of insulin is insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) (11). The substrate specificity of IDE is for amyloidogenic polypeptides, including atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), glucagon, and the ss-amyloid peptide found in Alzheimer s disease, and therefore may act as a scavenger that clears amyloidogenic peptides to prevent amyloid deposition (11,12). Recently, we showed that amylin was also an IDE substrate (13). Therefore, IDE may be involved in controlling the levels of amylin by degradation, similar to its role in regulating the levels of the Alzheimer s-related ss-amyloid peptide (14). Both the GK rat model of type 2 diabetes, in which IDE has been identified as a diabetes susceptibility gene, and the recently described IDE-null mice show impaired glucose metabolism. In both models, cellular insulin-degrading activity has been found to be impaired. Therefore, it is possible that in diabetes, IDE dysfunction also results in impaired amylin degradation, increased amylin aggregation, and, eventually, islet amyloid deposition. The present study was performed to address the following questions: 1) Are amylin and insulin degraded in ss-cells by a common pathway? 2) Does inhibition of IDE alter amylin degradation and islet amyloid formation? and 3) Does IDE inhibition affect the cytotoxic properties of amylin toward ss-cells? To answer these questions, a pancreatic ss-cell to derived cell line was used to characterize amylin degradation.
   RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Materials. Human and rat amylin were purchased from Bachem (Torrance, CA). Human amylin radiolabeled with 125I at the COOH-terminal was purchased from Peninsula Labs (San Carlos, CA). The 125I-insulin (mono-iodinated at the 14 position of the a-chain) and biosynthetic human insulin were provided by Lilly Research Laboratories. Bacitracin and Congo red were obtained from Sigma. The IDE-specific monoclonal antibody 9B12 (15) was kindly provided by Dr. Richard Roth (Stanford University, Stanford, CA).
Preparation of amylin solutions. Amylin solutions were prepared immediately before use from 1 mg/ml stock solutions into BSA-coated test tubes to prevent adhesion to plastic and minimize spontaneous amyloid fibril formation. Because of variable amounts of contaminating low-molecular-weight fragments and 125I-labeled albumin, the 125I-amylin was further purified by adsorption to a C18 Sep-Pak (Waters, Milford, MA) and eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile. The eluent was lyophilized and resuspended in the original buffer (0.1 mol/l sodium phosphate [pH 7.4] containing 0.05 mol/l NaCl, 0.1% NaN3, and 0.1% BSA) and frozen in aliquots until used.
Cell culture. Rat insulinoma (RIN-m5F) cells (16) were purchased from American Type Culture Collection and maintained in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 2.0 g/l glucose, 1 mmol/l L-glutamine, and 10  microg/ml gentamicin. For experiments, cells were subcultured into 24-well plates at 2.5 x 105 cells/well; the medium was changed every 2 days until used.
Cellular degradation of amylin and insulin. The degradation of amylin and insulin in RIN-m5F cells was determined by the trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solubility assay using a variation of a method previously described (17). Briefly, RIN-m5F cells in 24-well plates were changed into serum-free medium containing 0.1% BSA for 1 h. The medium was removed and 125I-amylin or 125I-labeled insulin in serum-free medium containing 0.1% BSA was then added (20,000 cpm/ml), and the cells were incubated at 37 degrees C for the times indicated. In some experiments, bacitracin was included at 1 mg/ml. The medium was removed and brought to 0.2% BSA and 16% TCA, chilled for 10 min on ice, and centrifuged at 3,000g for 15 min. The radioactivity in the supernatants and pellets was counted, and the degrading activity was expressed as the percent TCA soluble counts. In addition, the conditioned medium from the cells was removed and aliquots were tested for degrading activity by TCA solubility, as described above.
Immunodetection of IDE. Lysates were prepared from RIN-m5F cells in lysis buffer (50 mmol/l Tris [pH 7.4] containing 0.15 mol/l NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, and 0.1 mmol/l phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). Aliquots of 10  microg total protein were resolved in 7.5% SDS-PAGE then transferred to polyvinylidine fluoride membranes. For immunodetection, the membranes were probed with the 9B12 monoclonal antibody directed against IDE at 1:1,000 dilution for 1 h at room temperature. After being probed with a peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Jackson Immunochemicals, Temecula, CA) at 1:5,000 dilution for 1 h, immunoreactive proteins were detected by chemiluminescence.
Amyloid formation in RIN-m5F cultures. RIN-m5F cells were seeded onto poly-L-lysine-coated eight-well glass chamber slides at 105 cells/cm2. The medium was changed to serum-free RPMI-1640 containing 0.1% BSA before treatment, then cells were treated with human amylin (0.01 to 1.0  micromol/l) for 48 h. In some experiments, bacitracin was included at 1 mg/ml. To determine the involvement of IDE-like proteolytic activity in islet amyloid formation, some cells were also treated with the IDE inhibitor bacitracin (1 mg/ml) at the same time as the amylin addition. After treatment, the cells were washed with PBS, fixed for 5 min in 4% buffered formalin, and then stained for amyloid using a modified Congo red staining procedure (18). Briefly, the samples were counterstained with Weigert iron hematoxylin for 15 s, rinsed, then placed in 0.5% HCl in 70% ethanol for 5 s. After being washed, the samples were stained with Congo red for 20 min. The samples were immediately dehydrated to xylene and mounted. The degree of amyloid formation was determined by fluorescence microscopy using a tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate filter set.
Cell toxicity assessment. For cell toxicity studies, RIN-m5F cells were cultured in 96-well plates and treated with human or rat amylin, without and with bacitracin as described above for 48 h. Cell viability was measured by the reduction of methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT), as previously described (19).
Statistics. All data are expressed as means  plus or minus  SE. For degradation assays, comparisons for differences between groups were made by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett s posttest (degradation assays) or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest (viability assay). P  <  0.05 was interpreted as significant. Analyses were made using the GraphPad Prism3 software package.
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Amylin and insulin degradation by RIN-m5F cells was examined over time. The amount of degradation was limited to 20% to remain within the linear range of the assay. Degradation of 125I-amylin reached 20% by 30 min (Fig. 1). In contrast, 125I-insulin degraded much more slowly, and required 120 min of incubation to reach 20% degradation (Fig. 2). The addition of either unlabeled amylin or insulin to the reaction decreased the degradation of both substrates, indicating a common degradative pathway. The addition of the IDE inhibitor bacitracin essentially eliminated the degradation of amylin and insulin by the cells. There was no detectable amylin- or insulin-degrading activity in the conditioned medium (data not shown), suggesting that degradation was caused by uptake and intracellular degradation. The presence of IDE was readily detected in the cells by an immunoreactive band at 110 kDa (Fig. 2). Therefore, RIN-m5F cells possess mechanisms to internalize and degrade both insulin and amylin and to express IDE.
View larger version (22K):    FIG. 1. Amylin degradation in RIN-m5F cells over time. The degradation of amylin by RIN-m5F cells over time was measured by the production of acid-soluble products from 125I-amylin in cell culture media. Cells were also treated with 0.1  micromol/l unlabeled amylin or insulin or the IDE inhibitor bacitracin (1 mg/ml). Data are expressed as percent acid-soluble products produced (n = 3). , no treatment;  , + amylin; , + insulin; , + bacitracin.
  View larger version (20K):    FIG. 2. Insulin degradation in RIN-m5F cells over time. A: The degradation of insulin by RIN-m5F cells over time was measured by the production of acid-soluble products from 125I-insulin in cell culture media. Cells were also treated with 0.1  micromol/l unlabeled amylin or insulin or the IDE inhibitor bacitracin (1 mg/ml). Data are expressed as percent acid-soluble products produced (n = 3). , no treatment;  , + amylin; , + insulin; , + bacitracin. B: Lysates from RIN-m5F were probed with the IDE-specific monoclonal antibody 9B12, and immunoreactive proteins were detected by chemiluminescence. A single band at 110 kDa was detected, consistent with the presence of IDE.
  To further characterize amylin and insulin degradation in RIN-m5F cells, the degradation was measured with increasing dosages of unlabeled competitor. The degradation of 125I-amylin was decreased in a dosage-dependent manner by either unlabeled insulin or amylin (Fig. 3). At all concentrations, unlabeled insulin was a more effective inhibitor than amylin. Similarly, the degradation of 125I-insulin was inhibited by both amylin and insulin (Fig. 4), with insulin generally the more effective inhibitor. These observations were consistent with previously determined enzymatic properties of IDE, in which insulin had a three- to sixfold higher affinity for purified IDE than amylin (13). Two possible complications of the cell culture system are the potential for direct interaction between human amylin and insulin (20) and membrane perturbations that may impede receptor-mediated uptake of substrates (3). Rat amylin is also an IDE substrate (13), but it does not interact with insulin or cause membrane disruption. Rat amylin (100 nmol/l) inhibited insulin degradation to 49.7  plus or minus  1.2% of baseline insulin degradation, a result similar to that found with human amylin, indicating that reciprocal inhibition of amylin and insulin degradation is attributable to a common pathway of proteolysis.
View larger version (38K):    FIG. 3. Amylin degradation in RIN-m5F cells. The degradation of amylin by RIN-m5F cells was measured by the production of acid-soluble products from 125I-amylin in cell culture media. Cells were also treated with the indicated concentrations (nmol/l) of unlabeled amylin or unlabeled insulin. Data are expressed as percent acid-soluble products produced (n = 6). *P  <  0.05, **P  <  0.001.
  View larger version (37K):    FIG. 4. Insulin degradation in RIN-m5F cells. The degradation of insulin by RIN-m5F cells was measured by the production of acid-soluble products from 125I-amylin in cell culture media. Cells were also treated with the indicated concentrations (nmol/l) of unlabeled amylin or unlabeled insulin. Data are expressed as percent acid-soluble products produced (n = 6). **P  <  0.001.
  Because amylin is produced by healthy individuals without the formation of islet amyloid, a mechanism must be in place to prevent amylin aggregation under normal conditions. To examine whether cellular degradation by IDE may contribute to this protective process, a cell culture system to study islet amyloid formation was developed. RIN-m5F cells were cultured on poly-L-lysine-coated glass chamber slides for 3 days of culture, then treated with human amylin (10 to 1,000 nmol/l) for 48 h. Amyloid was detected by a modified Congo red fluorescence staining method (18), which includes an acidic iron hematoxylin counterstain that minimizes the intense autofluorescence seen using the original method (21). Human amylin induced a dosage-dependent increase in staining, detectable at 100 nmol/l and pronounced at 1  micromol/l (Fig. 5). This finding demonstrated that exogenous human amylin can form amyloid deposits in RIN-m5F cell cultures. When the cells were treated with the IDE inhibitor bacitracin, amyloid staining was markedly increased in intensity at all amylin concentrations compared with cells without bacitracin, including at the lowest amylin concentration (10 nmol/l). These findings suggest impairment of the cells  ability to clear amylin by a protease with characteristics consistent with IDE.
View larger version (75K):    FIG. 5. Bacitracin increases amyloid deposition in RIN-m5F cells. RIN-m5F cells were treated with 0, 10, 100, or 1,000 nmol/l human amylin, as indicated. Cells were cultured in the absence (left) or presence (right) of the IDE inhibitor bacitracin (Bac). Deposition of islet amyloid was detected by Congo red fluorescence. Brightfield exposures of the same cells are shown in the insets. Magnification x100.
  Because amylin has been implicated in ss-cell toxicity, the effect of IDE inhibition on RIN-m5F cell viability was determined by MTT reduction (Fig. 6). Treatment with human amylin for 48 h decreased cell viability in a dosage-dependent manner, peaking at 44% with 1,000 nmol/l amylin. In the presence of bacitracin, the cell viability was markedly lower at all amylin concentrations, reaching the maximum reduction (68%) at only 10 nmol/l amylin. Conversely, rat amylin had no effect on viability, whether with or without bacitracin. Therefore, an IDE inhibitor increased the ability of amylin to reduce RIN-m5F cell viability.
View larger version (24K):    FIG. 6. Bacitracin increases amylin-induced cytotoxicity. RIN-m5F cells were treated with 0, 10, 100, or 1,000 nmol/l human amylin or 1,000 nmol/l rat amylin, as indicated. Cells were cultured in the absence () or presence () of the IDE inhibitor bacitracin. Cell toxicity was assessed by the degree of MTT reduction by the cells (n = 6). *P  <  0.01.
     DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   A pathologic feature of type 2 diabetes is the presence of islet amyloid deposits composed predominantly of amylin (1). Whether islet amyloid is merely a marker of type 2 diabetes or actually contributes to the disease is a matter of some discussion. Several lines of evidence suggest an association between the presence of islet amyloid and diabetes and reduced ss-cell mass. In monkeys, the formation of islet amyloid correlates with early reduced insulin secretion and glucose intolerance, and, with time, correlates with greater deficiency in insulin secretion and glucose tolerance and ultimately hyperglycemia (22). In humans, the degree of amyloid formation correlates with the severity of diabetes, as evidenced by the requirement for insulin replacement therapy (23,24). Other evidence suggests that ss-cell death is caused by intermediate-sized fibrils that are precursors of islet amyloid (3,4). In this case, islet amyloid deposits reflect an end-stage effect of amylin aggregation secondary to ss-cell death.
The factors that prevent amylin fibril formation, ss-cell death, and islet amyloid deposition in the nondisease state are not understood. Because amylin is continually produced in nondiabetic humans with no amyloid formation, the mere presence of amylin is insufficient to cause fibril formation. Indeed, transgenic animals overexpressing human amylin do not form amyloid deposits (5 to 7,25), confirming that elevated amylin levels alone are insufficient for amyloid formation. However, when diabetic conditions are introduced, such as the ob mutation, growth hormone/steroid treatment, or a high-fat diet, these animals develop islet amyloid, islet dysfunction, reduced insulin secretion, and hyperglycemia (8 to 10). Therefore, in type 2 diabetes, the balance shifts from amylin clearance to deposition, either by increased amounts of a factor that promotes amylin aggregation or decreased amounts of a factor that clears amylin. Although there have been numerous studies regarding amylin synthesis and secretion, at present there have been few studies of amylin degradation.
The enzyme responsible for the intracellular degradation of insulin is IDE, a cytosolic metallothioprotease also known as insulysin (11,26). The primary function of IDE in mammalian tissues has traditionally been thought to be the degradation of insulin, but a number of other proteins have been identified as IDE substrates, including proteins structurally related to insulin, such as proinsulin, IGF-II, and relaxin, and seemingly unrelated peptides, such as ANP and glucagon (11). However, insulin, ANP, and glucagon all contain regions that can form ss-pleated sheets and are potentially amyloid forming (27). It has been proposed that rather than targeting a primary sequence motif, IDE is specific toward amyloidogenic peptides (28), a concept supported by findings that IDE also degrades amylin and ss-amyloid peptide (13,29,30). Recent studies have supported a role for IDE in type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer s disease, two conditions characterized by amyloid. Possible genetic linkages to type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer s disease have been mapped to the chromosomal region of the IDE gene (31 to 34). In the GK rat, a model of type 2 diabetes, IDE has been identified as a diabetes susceptibility gene; the mutations associated with this model result in lower cellular insulin degradation, hyperglycemia, reduced lipogenesis in fat cells, and reduced glucose uptake in vivo (35). The recently described IDE-null mouse model displays impaired insulin and ss-amyloid degradation, as well as hyperinsulinemia, glucose intolerance, and cerebral accumulation of ss-amyloid, hallmarks of both type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer s disease (36). Thus, the evidence is mounting that IDE plays a major role in diseases characterized by amyloid formation.
In a previous study using cell-free extracts (13), IDE readily degraded amylin, but with a lower affinity than for insulin. Radiolabeled amylin covalently cross-linked to IDE, and a monoclonal antibody directed against IDE immunoprecipitated both insulin- and amylin-degrading activities, confirming that IDE was the amylin-degrading protease. We have extended those findings to a rat ss-cell to derived line. Both amylin and insulin were degraded by RIN-m5F cells, but insulin was degraded much more slowly. Possible reasons for this observation include differences in binding and internalization through the different receptors or differences in receptor availability (e.g., by desensitization or cell toxicity). The differences may also be attributed to the nature of the assay. Unlike amylin, multiple cleavages are required to produce TCA-soluble fragments of insulin, and therefore, this assay tends to underestimate the level of insulin degradation. Amylin degradation began quickly, then leveled off with time. The probable explanation for this observation is based on insulin secretion by the cells. The cells were changed into fresh media containing labeled substrates, so initially there was no endogenously produced insulin in the media. RIN cells rapidly secreted insulin (reaching 5 to 10 nmol/l in 1 h), which would act as a competitive inhibitor of amylin degradation. Because the amylin was present in tracer amounts, sufficient insulin to competitively inhibit amylin degradation may well have been produced within 30 min. Both insulin and amylin were capable of competitive inhibition of either substrate, with insulin in general a better competitive inhibitor than amylin. As discussed above, this is likely attributable to the greater affinity of insulin for IDE and possibly also to the different internalization properties for insulin and amylin. The efficiency of unlabeled insulin inhibition of insulin degradation was consistent with that in previous reports showing a 50% inhibition of 50 to 100 nmol/l insulin using RIN-m5F cells (37). Taken together, the data suggest that insulin and amylin share a common pathway of degradation.
The specificity of amylin- and insulin-degrading activity was investigated using the IDE inhibitor bacitracin. Although bacitracin is not a specific inhibitor of IDE, other IDE inhibitors (e.g., N-ethylmaleimide and 1,10-phenanthroline) were highly toxic to RIN-m5F cells (R.G.B., unpublished observations), whereas bacitracin was well tolerated by the cells. Amylin and insulin degradation by RIN-m5F cells was markedly inhibited by bacitracin. Bacitracin also accelerated islet amyloid formation at all amylin concentrations, suggesting that inhibition of amylin degradation accelerates amylin aggregation and amyloid deposition. Because amylin has been implicated in ss-cell death, cell viability was examined under the same conditions. Cytotoxicity induced by human amylin was markedly increased with bacitracin treatment, whereas rat amylin had no effect, suggesting that amylin degradation is responsible for reducing cell toxicity caused by amylin. Amylin-induced cytotoxicity in ss-cells has been shown to be caused by intermediate amylin precursors rather than mature amyloid (3). If IDE degrades amylin monomers, then the formation of both intermediate precursors and amyloid fibrils would be prevented. The experiments performed here (48-h treatment of freshly prepared amylin) cannot determine which amylin species caused toxicity in RIN cells. However, the degree of cell death seen with bacitracin treatment was increased to the maximum attained, even at the lowest amylin concentration, which could mean that the toxicity preceded amyloid deposition. Although the amylin concentration required for detection of amyloid and cell toxicity (10 to 100 nmol/l) is high relative to circulating levels, the local amylin concentration around ss-cells is unknown, but may well be higher, especially under conditions that stimulate insulin and amylin secretion.
In summary, RIN-m5F cells clear amylin through a bacitracin-sensitive mechanism with properties consistent with those of IDE. Inhibition of this mechanism increased amyloid formation and cell toxicity. These data are consistent with the emerging concept of a role for IDE in diseases characterized by amyloid. In this regard, it is interesting to note again that transgenic animals expressing human amylin in general do not develop islet amyloid unless diabetic conditions are introduced. One of these conditions is a high-fat diet (9). Interestingly, it has been shown that increased lipid levels result in impaired insulin degradation (38) and free fatty acids directly inhibit IDE activity (39). The combination of increased expression of amyloidogenic amylin and impaired insulin-degrading activity may result in the formation of islet amyloid in these models. Therefore, it is possible that conditions leading to impaired IDE activity (e.g., elevated free fatty acids) contribute to amylin accumulation and aggregation, ss-cell toxicity, islet amyloid formation, and the progression of type 2 diabetes.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Research Service and the Bly Memorial Research Fund, University of Nebraska Medical Center.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Robert G. Bennett, PhD, Research Service (151), Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 4101 Woolworth Ave., Omaha, NE 68105. E-mail: rgbennet{at}unmc.edu
Received for publication January 15, 2003 and accepted in revised form June 3, 2003
ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; IDE, insulin-degrading enzyme; MTT, methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide; TCA, trichloroacetic acid
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Kahn SE, Andrikopoulos S, Verchere CB: Islet amyloid: a long-recognized but underappreciated pathological feature of type 2 diabetes.Diabetes48:241 to 253,1999[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kahn SE, D Alessio DA, Schwartz MW, Fujimoto WY, Ensinck JW, Taborsky GJ Jr, Porte D Jr: Evidence of cosecretion of islet amyloid polypeptide and insulin by beta-cells.Diabetes39:634 to 638,1990[Abstract] Janson J, Ashley RH, Harrison D, McIntyre S, Butler PC: The mechanism of islet amyloid polypeptide toxicity is membrane disruption by intermediate-sized toxic amyloid particles.Diabetes48:491 to 498,1999[Abstract] Janson J, Soeller WC, Roche PC, Nelson RT, Torchia AJ, Kreutter DK, Butler PC: Spontaneous diabetes mellitus in transgenic mice expressing human islet amyloid polypeptide.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A93:7283 to 7288,1996[Abstract/Free Full Text] Verchere CB, D Alessio DA, Wang S, Andrikopoulos S, Kahn SE: Transgenic overproduction of islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin) is not sufficient for islet amyloid formation.Horm Metab Res29:311 to 316,1997[Medline] Hoppener JW, Verbeek JS, de Koning EJ, Oosterwijk C, van Hulst KL, Visser-Vernooy HJ, Hofhuis FM, van Gaalen S, Berends MJ, Hackeng WH, et al: Chronic overproduction of islet amyloid polypeptide/amylin in transgenic mice: lysosomal localization of human islet amyloid polypeptide and lack of marked hyperglycaemia or hyperinsulinaemia.Diabetologia36:1258 to 1265,1993[Medline] Fox N, Schrementi J, Nishi M, Ohagi S, Chan SJ, Heisserman JA, Westermark GT, Leckstrom A, Westermark P, Steiner DF: Human islet amyloid polypeptide transgenic mice as a model of non- insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).FEBS Lett323:40 to 44,1993[Medline] Couce M, Kane LA, O Brien TD, Charlesworth J, Soeller W, McNeish J, Kreutter D, Roche P, Butler PC: Treatment with growth hormone and dexamethasone in mice transgenic for human islet amyloid polypeptide causes islet amyloidosis and beta-cell dysfunction.Diabetes45:1094 to 1101,1996[Abstract] Verchere CB, D Alessio DA, Palmiter RD, Weir GC, Bonner-Weir S, Baskin DG, Kahn SE: Islet amyloid formation associated with hyperglycemia in transgenic mice with pancreatic beta cell expression of human islet amyloid polypeptide.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A93:3492 to 3496,1996[Abstract/Free Full Text] Hoppener JW, Oosterwijk C, Nieuwenhuis MG, Posthuma G, Thijssen JH, Vroom TM, Ahren B, Lips CJ: Extensive islet amyloid formation is induced by development of type II diabetes mellitus and contributes to its progression: pathogenesis of diabetes in a mouse model.Diabetologia42:427 to 434,1999[Medline] Duckworth WC, Bennett RG, Hamel FG: Insulin degradation: progress and potential.Endocr Rev19:608 to 624,1998[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kurochkin IV: Insulin-degrading enzyme: embarking on amyloid destruction.Trends Biochem Sci26:421 to 425,2001[Medline] Bennett RG, Duckworth WC, Hamel FG: Degradation of amylin by insulin-degrading enzyme.J Biol Chem275:36621 to 36625,2000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Vekrellis K, Ye Z, Qiu WQ, Walsh D, Hartley D, Chesneau V, Rosner MR, Selkoe DJ: Neurons regulate extracellular levels of amyloid beta-protein via proteolysis by insulin-degrading enzyme.J Neurosci20:1657 to 1665,2000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Shii K, Roth RA: Inhibition of insulin degradation by hepatoma cells after microinjection of monoclonal antibodies to a specific cytosolic protease.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A83:4147 to 4151,1986[Abstract] Bhathena SJ, Oie HK, Gazdar AF, Voyles NR, Wilkins SD, Recant L: Insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin receptors on cultured cells and clones from rat islet cell tumor.Diabetes31:521 to 531,1982[Abstract] Peavy DE, Edmondson JW, Duckworth WC: Selective effects of inhibitors of hormone processing on insulin action in isolated hepatocytes.Endocrinology114:753 to 760,1984[Abstract] Churukian CJ: Improved Puchtler s Congo red method for demonstrating amyloid.J Histotechnol23:139 to 141,2000 Hansen MB, Nielsen SE, Berg K: Re-examination and further development of a precise and rapid dye method for measuring cell growth/cell kill.J Immunol Methods119:203 to 210,1989[Medline] Westermark P, Li ZC, Westermark GT, Leckstrom A, Steiner DF: Effects of beta cell granule components on human islet amyloid polypeptide fibril formation.FEBS Lett379:203 to 206,1996[Medline] Puchtler H, Sweat F, Levine M: On the binding of Congo red by amyloid.J Histochem Cytochem10:355 to 364,1962 Howard CF: Longitudinal studies on the development of diabetes in individual Macaca nigra.Diabetologia29:301 to 306,1986[Medline] Kahn SE, Verchere CB, Andrikopoulos S, Asberry PJ, Leonetti DL, Wahl PW, Boyko EJ, Schwartz RS, Newell-Morris L, Fujimoto WY: Reduced amylin release is a characteristic of impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes in Japanese Americans.Diabetes47:640 to 645,1998[Abstract] Westermark P: Amyloid and polypeptide hormones. What is their relationship?Amyloid1:47 to 60,1994 D Alessio DA, Verchere CB, Kahn SE, Hoagland V, Baskin DG, Palmiter RD, Ensinck JW: Pancreatic expression and secretion of human islet amyloid polypeptide in a transgenic mouse.Diabetes43:1457 to 1461,1994[Abstract] Becker AB, Roth RA: Insulysin and pitrilysin: insulin-degrading enzymes of mammals and bacteria.Meth Enzymol248:693 to 703,1995[Medline] Sipe JD: Amyloidosis.Annu Rev Biochem61:947 to 975,1992[Medline] Kurochkin IV: Amyloidogenic determinant as a substrate recognition motif of insulin-degrading enzyme.FEBS Lett427:153 to 156,1998[Medline] Goto S, Kurochkin IV: Alzheimer s s ss-amyloid peptide interacts with and is degraded by insulin degrading enzyme.FEBS Lett345:33 to 37,1994[Medline] Qiu WQ, Walsh DM, Ye Z, Vekrellis K, Zhang J, Podlisny MB, Rosner MR, Safavi A, Hersh LB, Selkoe DJ: Insulin-degrading enzyme regulates extracellular levels of amyloid beta-protein by degradation.J Biol Chem273:32730 to 32738,1998[Abstract/Free Full Text] Wiltshire S, Hattersley AT, Hitman GA, Walker M, Levy JC, Sampson M, O Rahilly S, Frayling TM, Bell JI, Lathrop GM, Bennett A, Dhillon R, Fletcher C, Groves CJ, Jones E, Prestwich P, Simecek N, Rao PV, Wishart M, Bottazzo GF, Foxon R, Howell S, Smedley D, Cardon LR, Menzel S, McCarthy MI: A genomewide scan for loci predisposing to type 2 diabetes in a U.K. population (the Diabetes UK Warren 2 Repository): analysis of 573 pedigrees provides independent replication of a susceptibility locus on chromosome 1q.Am J Hum Genet69:553 to 569,2001[Medline] Bertram L, Blacker D, Mullin K, Keeney D, Jones J, Basu S, Yhu S, McInnis MG, Go RC, Vekrellis K, Selkoe DJ, Saunders AJ, Tanzi RE: Evidence for genetic linkage of Alzheimer s s disease to chromosome 10q.Science290:2302 to 2303,2000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Myers A, Holmans P, Marshall H, Kwon J, Meyer D, Ramic D, Shears S, Booth J, DeVrieze FW, Crook R, Hamshere M, Abraham R, Tunstall N, Rice F, Carty S, Lillystone S, Kehoe P, Rudrasingham V, Jones L, Lovestone S, Perez-Tur J, Williams J, Owen MJ, Hardy J, Goate AM: Susceptibility locus for Alzheimer s s disease on chromosome 10.Science290:2304 to 2305,2000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ertekin-Taner N, Graff-Radford N, Younkin LH, Eckman C, Baker M, Adamson J, Ronald J, Blangero J, Hutton M, Younkin SG: Linkage of plasma Abeta42 to a quantitative locus on chromosome 10 in late-onset Alzheimer s s disease pedigrees.Science290:2303 to 2304,2000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Fakhrai-Rad H, Nikoshkov A, Kamel A, Fernstrom M, Zierath JR, Norgren S, Luthman H, Galli J: Insulin-degrading enzyme identified as a candidate diabetes susceptibility gene in GK rats.Hum Mol Genet9:2149 to 2158,2000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Farris W, Mansourian S, Chang Y, Lindsley L, Eckman EA, Frosch MP, Eckman CB, Tanzi RE, Selkoe DJ, Guenette S: Insulin-degrading enzyme regulates the levels of insulin, amyloid beta-protein, and the beta-amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain in vivo.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A100:4162 to 4167,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bhathena SJ, Timmers KI, Oie HK, Voyles NR, Recant L: Cytosolic insulin-degrading activity in islet-derived tumor cell lines and in normal rat islets.Diabetes34:121 to 128,1985[Abstract] Oehler G, Bleyl H, Matthes KJ: Hyperinsulinemia in hepatic steatosis.Int J Obe Relat Metab Disord6 (Suppl. 1):137 to 144,1982 Hamel FG, Upward JL, Bennett RG: In vitro inhibition of insulin-degrading enzyme by long chain fatty acids and their coenzyme A thioesters.Endocrinology144:2404 to 2408,2003[Abstract/Free Full Text]
