Agouti-Related Protein-Like Immunoreactivity: Characterization of Release from Hypothalamic Tissue and Presence in Serum1 Ji-Yao Li, Susan Finniss, Ying-Kui Yang, Qun Zeng, Song-Yi Qu, Greg Barsh2, Chris Dickinson and Ira Gantz
Departments of Surgery (J.-Y.L., Y.-K.Y., Q.Z., S.-Y.Q., I.G.) and Pediatrics (S.F., C.D.), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0682; and Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics (G.B.), Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305-5428
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Ira Gantz, M.D., 6504 MSRB I, 1150 W. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0682. E-mail: IGantz{at}UMich.edu
   Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   A novel RIA was used to examine the release of agouti-related protein-like immunoreactivity (AGRP-LI) from perfused rat hypothalamic tissue slices and to characterize AGRP-LI in rat serum. A continuous low level basal AGRP-LI release was observed from hypothalami of rats fed ad libitum before the rats were killed. Basal AGRP-LI release was 3-fold greater in rats fasted 48 h. In fasted animals leptin dose-dependently suppressed basal AGRP-LI release. In fed animals no change in basal AGRP-LI release was detected in response to 10-6 M -MSH, orexin B, melanin-concentrating hormone, or serotonin. HPLC analysis of AGRP-LI in rat serum identified a single peak that eluted in close proximity to synthetic AGRP (87 to 132) and mouse [Leu127Pro]AGRP and that was identical to the peak seen in hypothalamic and adrenal tissue extracts. The serum concentration of AGRP-LI in rats fed ad libitum was 0.865  plus or minus  0.323 nmol/liter (mean  plus or minus  SE). Food deprivation resulted in a slow, but statistically significant rise in serum immunoreactivity at 48 h [1.174  plus or minus  0.118 nmol/liter (mean  plus or minus  SE)]. Bilateral adrenalectomy did not change serum levels of AGRP-LI. These studies demonstrate that in the rat there are different levels of basal hypothalamic AGRP-LI release in fed and fasted states and that in the fasted rat this release can be profoundly suppressed by leptin. These studies also suggest that AGRP is present in the systemic circulation of rats.
   Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   AGOUTI-RELATED protein (AGRP) is an orexigenic neuropeptide produced by neuropeptide Y (NPY)-containing neurons in the medial portion of the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus that functions in the central control of feeding behavior (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). Its mechanism of action appears to be the competitive antagonism of -MSH, a potent satiety-inducing agent produced by POMC-producing neurons located more laterally in the arcuate nucleus (2, 3, 4, 6, 7). Pharmacological studies using the cloned melanocortin receptors (MCRs), have demonstrated that AGRP is a very potent antagonist of -MSH action at the MC3R and MC4R and that it also has some potency at the MC5R (6).
Both the MC3R and MC4R are expressed within hypothalamic feeding centers. Therefore, both of these MCR subtypes must be considered potential targets for AGRP action in central processes regulating food intake. However, while genetic and pharmacological models have firmly established the role of the MC4R in feeding behavior, the participation of the MC3R in these events can only been inferred from the distribution of its messenger RNA (mRNA) (5, 8, 9, 10, 11).
Release of AGRP in the hypothalamus has not previously been examined due to the lack of a reliable RIA. Therefore, factors affecting the acute release of AGRP have only been surmised from studies that have examined changes in the level of its mRNA under various conditions. Factors presently known to alter AGRP mRNA levels in the arcuate nucleus include fasting and leptin. AGRP mRNA levels are increased in normal mice that are fasted and genetically obese mice that lack leptin (ob/ob) or its receptor (db/db) (1, 3, 7). Administration of exogenous leptin to normal mice and ob/ob mice has also been shown to reduce AGRP mRNA levels (12).
Because AGRP and NPY are produced by the same neuron (4), agents known to affect NPY synthesis and release might conceivably also influence the synthesis and release of AGRP. Leptin has been shown to decrease NPY mRNA levels (13, 14). However, the acute effects of leptin on NPY release have been conflicting. Leptin was reported to decrease NPY release from perfused hypothalami of lean Zucker rats (15). In contrast, in vivo studies with Long-Evans rats failed to demonstrate an acute effect of leptin on NPY release from the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), the hypothalamic region believed to be the major site of release of NPY produced in the arcuate nucleus (16). In other in vivo studies, the serotonin antagonist methysergide has been shown to increase NPY secretion and the 5-HT1B/2C receptor agonist m-CPP has been shown to reduce NPY protein levels in the PVN of the rat (17, 18). Therefore, leptin and serotonin might be expected to have an acute effect on hypothalamic AGRP release.
In both the rat and human arcuate nucleus AGRP-NPY- and -MSH-containing neurons send projections to the lateral hypothalamus (19, 20). This hypothalamic region contains neurons that produce the orexigenic agents melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and orexin A and B. This anatomical arrangement is consistent with the widely held concept that the arcuate nucleus provides important neurochemical input to the lateral hypothalamus. However, fibers from the lateral hypothalamic area have also been reported to project to the medial hypothalamus (21, 22). This raises the possibility that the orexigenic agents produced in the lateral hypothalamus could reciprocally influence the release of NPY and AGRP from AGRP-NPY-containing neurons.
To date the majority of investigations have focused on AGRP s orexigenic role in the hypothalamus. Nonetheless, it is worthwhile to note that expression of AGRP mRNA has been reported in a number of other sites. In humans and rodents, the adrenal glands (cortex and medulla), appear to be the site of the highest level of AGRP mRNA expression after the hypothalamus (1, 3). AGRP mRNA has also been documented in the subthalamic nucleus, lung, and testis of humans and in rodents it has been reported in lung, kidney, testis, ovary, and muscle tissues (1, 3). The function of AGRP in those extra-hypothalamic sites is presently unknown. Although the distribution of MCRs in the peripheral tissues of humans and rodents has not been extensively studied, expression of several MCR subtypes sensitive to the action of AGRP has been reported in peripheral tissues. Available data indicates that in humans and rodents MC3R and MC5R mRNA is expressed in the gastrointestinal tract and/or pancreas (23, 24). In rodents expression of MC5R mRNA has been reported in the adrenal glands, skeletal muscle, and lacrimal glands (23, 24, 25).
Within the context of this information we sought to establish a RIA that could be used to further explore the central and peripheral actions of AGRP. The present studies used this RIA to characterize basal AGRP-LI release from perfused rat hypothalamic slices and identify factors that influence that release. In addition the RIA was used to explore whether or not rodent serum contains AGRP-LI and attempted to identify the tissue source of the immunoreactivity.
   Materials and Methods Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   AGRP RIA AGRP (87 to 132) and mouse [Leu127Pro]AGRP (full-length AGRP minus its signal sequence) were synthesized by Gryphon Sciences (S. San Francisco, CA). The recombinant human agouti protein used was previously described (6). -MSH, ACTH, and [Nle4, DPhe7] -MSH (NDP-MSH), were purchased from Peninsula Laboratories, Inc. Leptin was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Orexin A and B and MCH were purchased from Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Mountain View, CA). NPY was purchased from American Peptide Co. (Sunnyvale, CA). Serotonin and 1-(m-chlorophenyl)-piperazine (m-CPP) were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
A rabbit polyclonal anti-AGRP antibody raised against partially purified recombinant human AGRP was diluted to a titer of 1:200,000. This antibody has been previously characterized in immunohistochemical studies where it was found to be specific for AGRP (7). 125I-AGRP (87 to 132) was prepared by simple oxidative methods using chloramine-T and Na125I (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) as previously described (6). Briefly, 10  microl of a 2.4 mg/ml solution of chloramine-T (Sigma) in 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4) was added for 15 sec and the reaction stopped with 50  microl of a 4.8 mg/ml solution of sodium metabisulfite (Sigma). The reaction mixture was then diluted in 800  microl of 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.8) and purified by reverse phase chromatography using a C18 column. 100  microl of a 2% solution of BSA was immediately added to all fractions containing radioactivity.
RIAs were performed in a 0.05 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) containing 2 mM EDTA, 200 mg/liter sodium azide, and 1 g/liter BSA. When antibody was diluted 1:200,000 and using 5,000 cpm of 125I-AGRP (87 to 132) the dose of half-maximal inhibition of specific binding (ID50) was 10 fmol/ml. Under these conditions, no cross-reactivity was observed with recombinant agouti protein, -MSH, ACTH, NDP-MSH, leptin, orexin B, or neuropeptide Y. However, 0.0038% cross-reactivity was noted for orexin A.
Measurement of AGRP-like immunoreactivity in tissue For characterization of AGRP-LI in tissue, freshly dissected rat tissues were homogenized in 3% acetic acid (10 ml/g tissue) and centrifuged at 3,000 rpm at 4 C for 10 min. Supernatants were titrated to pH 7.0 and stored at -20 C until used. For chromatographic analysis of AGRP-LI molecular forms, samples were diluted 1 to 10 in buffer A (50 mM ammonium acetate, pH 5.3). The material to be assayed was then loaded on a FPLC HR 5/5 pepRPC (C18) column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ) previously equilibrated with buffer A. After the absorbance at 280 nm (A280) had returned to baseline following sample application, the column was eluted with buffer B (buffer A + 75% acetonitrile) in a linear gradient at a flow rate of 1 ml/min and 1 ml fractions were collected. The recovery of synthetic AGRP (87 to 132) from the C18 column was 80%.
Measurement of AGRP-like immunoreactivity in serum Serum could not be directly assayed for AGRP-LI because of interfering proteins in blood. Therefore, serum AGRP-LI was characterized by HPLC as described above. In addition, because the measurement of serum AGRP-LI in experiments using groups of rats required the assay of a large number of samples of limited volume, a serum AGRP-LI assay was developed using a C18 cartridge. For these experiments serum was diluted 10-fold in buffer A and loaded onto a C18 environmental cartridge (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). Samples were eluted with 60% acetonitrile before lyophilization. Lyophilized samples were reconstituted in distilled water for assay. Recovery of synthetic AGRP (87 to 132) was 30%. Because of the relatively poor recovery, we sought to compare serum measurement using the C18 cartridge with standard HPLC. The two methods of measurement resulted in nearly identical determinations of serum AGRP concentration. Therefore, the two methods only differed in the percentage of AGRP-LI recovered from serum.
AGRP-LI in tissues and serum was also characterized by ion-exchange chromatography. Tissue extracts or sera were diluted 10-fold in 50 mM MES (pH 5.5) and applied to a FPLC HR 5/5 Mono S cation exchange column previously equilibrated in the diluting buffer. After the A280 had returned to baseline following sample application, the column was eluted with a NaCl gradient at a flow rate of 1 ml/min and 1 ml fractions collected.
Hypothalamic tissue perfusion Male Sprague Dawley rats weighing 280 to 300 g were housed under conditions of controlled temperature (20  plus or minus  2 C) and lighting (0700 to 1900 h). Animals were housed in the Unit of Laboratory Animal Medicine facilities at the University of Michigan and all animal experiments were approved by the University Committee on Use and Care of Animals. Rats were killed by cervical dislocation then decapitated. Hypothalami were harvested between 1000 h and 1100 h to avoid circadian variation. Hypothalami were rapidly removed by dissecting the brain at the optic chiasm rostrally, the hypothalamic fissures laterally, the mammillary bodies caudally, and the ventral surface of the thalamus dorsally. Hypothalami were then separated into five coronal slices using a razor blade. Eight hypothalami were used in each experiment. The perfusion system consisted of a fixed stem jacketed tissue vessel (Harvard Apparatus, Cambridge, MA), a constant temperature circulating water bath (HAAKE, Karlsruhe, Germany) and peristaltic pump (Harvard Apparatus). The perfusion chamber was kept at 37 C and continuously perfused with modified Krebs-Ringer-bicarbonate buffer (composition in mM: NaCl 120, KCl 5, CaCl2 2.6, MgSO4 0.7, KH2PO4 1.2, NaHCO3 27.5, pH 7.4) supplemented with 2 g/liter glucose and 0.1% BSA and aerated with 95% O2/5% CO2 at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. Samples were collected on ice at 10 min intervals and stored at -70 C. Before RIA determinations the samples (2 ml) were lyophilized and reconstituted in 0.65 ml of distilled water. NPY was measured using a commercially available NPY RIA kit (Peninsula Laboratories, Inc. Belmont, CA). Each experiment was repeated at least four times. The effect of each concentration of leptin on hypothalamic AGRP-LI release was determined in separate experiments. 50 mM potassium chloride (KCl) depolarization was used to test tissue viability at the end of all experiments. In perfusion studies AGRP-LI was expressed as the fmol release per mg of hypothalamic protein to minimize for small differences that might result from the use of slightly differing amounts of tissue. Total protein was determined by colorometric assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA).
Bilateral adrenalectomy Three groups of rats were used in this experiment. Group 1 consisted of 8 animals that had bilateral adrenalectomies, Group 2 consisted of 8 animals that had bilateral adrenalectomies + corticosterone replacement, and Group 3 consisted of 8 animals that had a sham operation. Bilateral adrenalectomies were performed through a flank incision using xylazine (3 mg/kg) and ketamine (120 mg/kg) anesthesia. Sham operations were performed by manipulating the animal in an identical manner, but without removal of the adrenal glands. Completeness of bilateral adrenalectomy was confirmed by measurement of serum corticosterone using a RIA (Diagnostic Products Corp., Los Angeles, CA). Adrenalectomized animals received 0.9% NaCl in their drinking water. Group 2 received corticosterone replacement by daily injection of 1.5 mg/kg sc between 18.00 and 18.30 as previously described (26). 1.5 ml of blood was collected under ether anesthesia for assay of AGRP-LI at 1 week, 2 weeks, and 3 weeks.
Northern blot analysis of AGRP mRNA Individual hypothalami of fed or fasted rats were dissected and stored in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was extracted using Trizol Reagent (Life Technologies, Inc., Grand Island, NY). Twenty-five micrograms of total RNA was loaded per well and electrophoresed on a denaturing gel (2.2 M formaldehyde, 1 x MOPS). RNA was then transferred to a nylon membrane and hybridized with a random primed 32P labeled partial length rat AGRP complementary DNA (cDNA) probe. A random primed 32P labeled glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPD) was used to check equivalency of well loading. Blots were hybridized overnight at 42 C in buffer containing 50% formamide, 1 x Denhardt s, 6 x SSPE, 0.5% SDS and salmon sperm DNA (100  microg/ml). Final wash conditions were 55 C in 0.1% SSC, 0.2% SDS. Blots were exposed for 12 h using Kodak XAR film (Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, NY). RNA was quantified using a Hewlett-Packard Co. ScanJet 4C/T scanner and the NIH Image 1.55 program.
Statistical analysis Physiological data are expressed as a mean  plus or minus  SE. Two way ANOVA with repeated measures was used to compare the basal release of AGRP-LI and NPY from the hypothalami of fed and 48 h fasted rats (see Figs. 2 and 6) and for the comparison of serum levels of AGRP-LI in adrenalectomy experiments (see Fig. 9). One way ANOVA followed by Tukey-Kramer posthoc test was used to analyze leptin inhibition of AGRP-LI and NPY release from hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats (see Figs. 3 and 7). One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett s method for multiple comparison was used to analyze the dose-dependency of leptin inhibition of AGRP-LI release from hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats (see Fig. 4) and the rise in serum AGRP-LI in 24 and 48 h fasted rats (see Fig. 8). Student s t test was used to determine the statistical significance of the change in hypothalamic AGRP mRNA in 48 h fasted rats (see Fig. 5).
View larger version (32K):    Figure 2. Comparison of the basal AGRP-LI release from the hypothalami of rats fed ad libitum and fasted 48 h before rats were killed.
  View larger version (50K):    Figure 6. Comparison of the basal NPY release from the hypothalami of rats fed ad libitum and fasted 48 h before rats were killed.
  View larger version (29K):    Figure 9. Effect of bilateral adrenalectomy on rat serum AGRP-LI.
  View larger version (45K):    Figure 3. Leptin inhibition of AGRP-LI release from the hypothalami of rats fasted 48 h before rats were killed. This graph depicts the response to 10-7 M leptin. (* P  <  0.03, **P  <  0.001).
  View larger version (55K):    Figure 7. Leptin inhibition of NPY release from the hypothalami of rats fasted 48 h before rats were killed. The graph depicts the response to 10-6 M leptin. (* P  <  0.03).
  View larger version (46K):    Figure 4. Dose-dependent suppression of basal hypothalamic AGRP-LI release by leptin in rats fasted 48 h. Suppression at 40 min was used to calculate the dose-response. (* P  <  0.01, ** P  <  0.001).
  View larger version (55K):    Figure 8. Rise in serum AGRP-LI in rats fasted 24 and 48 h (* P  <  0.01).
  View larger version (35K):    Figure 5. Increase in hypothalamic AGRP mRNA in rats fasted 48 h. Equivalency of well loading was checked by measuring glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPD) (* P  <  0.01).
     Results Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Tissue and serum AGRP-like immunoreactivity AGRP-LI was found in both central and peripheral tissues (Table 1). The greatest concentrations of AGRP-LI were present in hypothalamus and adrenal gland. Very low levels of AGRP-LI were noted in brain striatum and thalamus. No AGRP-LI was detectable in brain cortex or liver tissue. When characterized by reverse phase C18 HPLC, synthetic AGRP (87 to 132) eluted as a single peak earlier than the peak of full-length [Leu127Pro]AGRP. Hypothalamic tissue AGRP-LI eluted as a single peak close to the elution position of AGRP (87 to 132) (Fig. 1A). Although not depicted in Fig. 1, the peak of adrenal tissue AGRP-LI was superimposable with the peak observed from hypothalamic tissue except that the amount of immunoreactivity was less. AGRP-LI eluted from the C18 environmental cartridge was found to coelute with serum applied directly to the C18 HPLC column. AGRP-LI present in rat serum eluted near the immunoreactivity found in hypothalamus (Fig. 1A). Further characterization of rat tissue and serum AGRP-LI by cation-exchange chromatography revealed that AGRP-LI eluted as single peak but somewhat later than synthetic AGRP (87 to 132), suggesting that it was more positively charged than the synthetic peptide (Fig. 1B). While the chromatography data suggest that there is posttranslational processing of tissue and serum AGRP further analysis will be required.
View this table:    Table 1. Concentrations of AGRP-LI in different tissues of rats fed ad libitum before being killed
  View larger version (19K):    Figure 1. A, C18 chromatograph of AGRP-LI in rat hypothalamic tissue and serum. B, Mono-S chromatograph of AGRP-LI in rat hypothalamic tissue and serum.
  AGRP-LI release from perfused hypothalamic tissue slices As shown in Fig. 2, a continuous low level of AGRP-LI was released from the hypothalami of rats fed ad libitum before they were killed ( < 0.5 fmol release/mg hypothalamic protein). In contrast, a significantly greater amount of AGRP-LI (1.0 to 1.2 fmol release/mg hypothalamic protein) was released from the hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats. Comparison of the 13 time points before administration of 50 mM KCl revealed that the difference in AGRP-LI release from hypothalami of fed and 48 h fasted animals was statistically significant (P  <  0.001). On average AGRP-LI release was 3-fold greater in 48 h fasted rats. Analysis of the last two time periods in Fig. 2 revealed that there was also a statistically significant greater amount of KCl-induced AGRP-LI released from the hypothalami of 48 h fasted vs. fed rats (P  <  0.001). In time period 15, the perfusion of hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats with 50 mM KCl resulted in a 262% increase of AGRP-LI over mean basal release. The response to KCl administration toward the end of all perfusion studies demonstrates not only tissue viability, but also the presence of substantial additional AGRP-LI stores. Time did not appear to have any effect on basal AGRP-LI release (or basal NPY release, see Fig. 7) during the time course of these studies.
As shown in Fig. 3, addition of leptin to the perfusate caused inhibition of AGRP-LI release from the hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats. Comparison of the 40 min before the administration of 10-7 M leptin (baseline period) to the 40 min during which leptin was infused revealed that this inhibition was statistically significant (P  <  0.001). During the time period of leptin infusion inhibition reached statistical significance at 30 min (P  <  0.03). A persistent leptin effect remained for at least 30 min after cessation of the leptin infusion with maximal inhibition of AGRP-LI occurring 70 min after initiation of leptin. Compared with AGRP-LI released during the 40 min baseline time period maximal inhibition was 90%. Figure 4 demonstrates the dose-dependency of leptin inhibition of AGRP-LI. In comparison to 10-7 M leptin, 10-6 M leptin also caused maximal inhibition at 70 min at which time 95% inhibition was observed. No increase in the basal release of AGRP-LI was observed in fed animals in response to -MSH (10-8 M, 10-7 M, or 10-6 M), orexin B (10-6 M), MCH (10-7 M or 10-6 M), serotonin (10-6 M), or m-CPP (10-6 M). In 48 h fasted rats neither orexin B (10-6 M) nor serotonin (10-6 M) altered baseline release of AGRP-LI. Cross-reactivity of the antibody made it impossible to accurately determine the effect of orexin A on hypothalamic AGRP-LI release at high doses of orexin A, but no effect was seen at 10-7 M or 10-8 M orexin A. We also measured AGRP mRNA levels and detected a statistically significant 2.8-fold increase in fasted vs. fed animals (P  <  0.01) (Fig. 5).
NPY release from perfused hypothalamic tissue slices NPY release was determined from the same samples that were used to determine AGRP-LI release. As shown in Fig. 6, the amount of NPY release was greater from the hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats than from the hypothalami of rats fed ad libitum before they were killed (P  <  0.001). On average fasted animals released 80% more NPY. As shown in Fig. 7, leptin (10-6 M) inhibited NPY release from the hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats. Comparison of the 40-min time period before the administration of leptin (baseline time period) to the 40-min time period during which leptin was infused reveals that this inhibition was statistically significant (P  <  0.01). Statistically significant inhibition was reached at 40 min (P  <  0.03). As was the case with AGRP-LI, a residual effect of leptin on NPY release persisted for at least 30 min after cessation of the NPY infusion. Compared with the average release of NPY during the 40 min baseline time period the maximal inhibition of NPY occurred 1 h after beginning the leptin infusion and was 33%. We did not observe any increase in NPY release in fed animals with the administration of orexin B (10-6 M) or MCH (10-6 M). Although we could not determine the effects of high dose orexin A on AGRP-LI because of the cross-reactivity previously mentioned, we did not observe any increase in NPY release in fed animals in response to high dose orexin A (10-6 M).
Effect of fasting and bilateral adrenalectomy on serum AGRP-like immunoreactivity A slow rise in serum AGRP-LI occurred during the 48 h fast (Fig. 8). At 24 h, the increase in serum AGRP-LI was not statistically significant. However, the increase in serum AGRP-LI did reach statistical significance at 48 h. Bilateral adrenalectomy with or without corticosterone replacement had no significant effect on serum AGRP-like immunoreactivity in fed animals (Fig. 9). Serum corticosterone levels were found to be negligible in rats that had undergone bilateral adrenalectomy. Bilateral adrenalectomy also did not lead to any changes in the level of hypothalamic AGRP mRNA (data not shown).
   Discussion Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   In these studies, development of a specific AGRP RIA enabled us to examine several previously unexplored aspects of AGRP physiology. The actual release of AGRP from the hypothalamus has not previously been reported, and using this RIA we were able to examine the effects of fasting on the basal release of AGRP and the effects of certain chemical messengers on that release. Second, the RIA allowed us to examine serum for the presence of AGRP and investigate the possibility that the adrenal gland was the source of that immunoreactivity. This facet of our studies was prompted by the observation that the adrenal gland has the second greatest level of AGRP mRNA expression in the body (after the hypothalamus) and is a tissue known for the secretion of regulatory factors into the bloodstream. At the inception of these studies, we hypothesized that adrenal AGRP might be secreted into the systemic circulation and act on peripheral MCRs. Although the serum levels of AGRP-LI we observe are within the physiologic range, the adrenal gland does not appear to contribute to that immunoreactivity.
Specificity of the AGRP RIA To ensure the veracity of our findings we critically examined the specificity of our AGRP RIA. Several lines of evidence support our contention that the RIA is specific. First, in preliminary experiments we found a low ID50 [10 fmol/ml for AGRP (87 to 132)] and no cross-reactivity to a number of other peptides including -MSH, NPY, orexin B, leptin, and agouti protein. The latter is most notable in that agouti protein shares with AGRP a very similar cysteine-rich C-terminal motif. Moreover, the antibody recognizes AGRP s C-terminus [AGRP (87 to 132)], which is a portion of the molecule that is critical to bioactivity in pharmacological studies (6).
Second, the concentrations of AGRP-LI observed in the tissue extracts listed in Table 1 correlate well with the levels of mRNA known to be present in those tissues. For example, AGRP mRNA is expressed at its highest levels in the hypothalamus with the next highest level of expression in the adrenal glands (1, 3). Consistent with that data, we observed that AGRP-LI was greatest in the hypothalamus followed by the adrenal gland. Similarly, no AGRP mRNA has been reported in liver by Northern blot or PCR (1, 3) and consistent with those data no AGRP-LI was detected in extracted hepatic tissue. In addition, the increase in basal release of hypothalamic AGRP-LI observed in fasted rats correlated with the increase in mRNA observed in similarly fasted rats.
Third, the results of our chromatographic analysis strongly support the specificity of the RIA. Both tissue and serum AGRP-LI eluted in a single peak close to the elution position of synthetic AGRP (87 to 132). An important control in serum data were the observation that AGRP-LI eluted from the C18 environmental cartridge coeluted with serum applied directly to the C18 HPLC column in similar amounts. This observation indicates that the only significant difference between the two assay methods (C18 cartridge vs. C18 HPLC) is that the C18 cartridge results in significantly lower recovery of AGRP-LI. Nonetheless, the cartridge method facilitates the analysis of multiple samples.
Release of AGRP-LI from hypothalamic slices In these studies, we were able to confirm that release of AGRP-LI correlates with the changes in AGRP mRNA previously observed in fed and fasted states or with leptin administration (7, 12). In our studies, we noted a 3-fold increase in hypothalamic AGRP-LI released from the hypothalami of 48 h fasted rats. This change correlates nicely with the nearly 3-fold increase in AGRP mRNA observed in our studies (Fig. 5). However, the increase in AGRP mRNA observed in these rat studies are much less than the 15-fold increase in AGRP mRNA noted in the mouse (1, 7) and may reflect interspecies differences. Recently, Harrold et al. described a 91% reduction in AGRP concentrations in 10 day food-restricted rats and hypothesized that the marked reduction in AGRP (in a physiological state that might be expected to be associated with increased AGRP concentrations) was due to increased peptide release (27). Although we did not measure static concentrations of AGRP-LI in 48 fasted rats, our results are consistent with their hypothesis of increased AGRP release in physiological states associated with hunger.
In our experiments, we observed that the basal release of AGRP-LI from the hypothalamus varies with the nutritional state of the animal (fed vs. fasted). We also observed that the fat hormone leptin has a profound influence on this release. This effect was most obvious in the fasted animals because their AGRP-LI levels are elevated. The observed suppression of AGRP-LI by leptin in fasted rats is what one would expect from a hormone that provides feedback to the hypothalamus regarding the adequacy of nutritional intake. We also observed a significant decrease of NPY release with leptin administration, which has previously been noted by Lee et al. (15). These data indicate that leptin concomitantly affects AGRP and NPY release from AGRP-NPY-containing arcuate nucleus neuron.
While the present studies are unable to distinguish whether the observed AGRP-LI release is governed by the constitutive or regulated pathways (or released through both pathways), the fact that KCl depolarization caused a large release of AGRP-LI suggests that at least some AGRP is stored and released with the regulated pathway. This is consistent with the notion that AGRP is an important regulatory neuropeptide and not merely a protein released constitutively from cells.
Several pieces of data indicate that the observed leptin suppression of AGRP-LI release from the hypothalamus of fasted animals was a specific effect. Importantly, the response was dose dependent and was not induced by any of the other peptide agents used in these studies. In addition, a simultaneous inhibition of NPY release was observed which makes the likelihood of a nonspecific AGRP response less likely. Thus, we hypothesize that the effect of leptin on AGRP-LI release is a result of the action of leptin on leptin receptors known to be present on the AGRP-NPY-containing neuron (7, 20). However, in our in vitro system the perfusate bathed the entire hypothalamus and the leptin-containing perfusate could have influenced the release of chemical messengers from other hypothalamic neurons expressing leptin receptors that also affect AGRP release. It is therefore conceivable that the leptin effect observed in these studies represents a summation response of the AGRP-NPY-containing neuron. Nonetheless, our data are consistent with the hypothesis that leptin is a predominant regulator of AGRP release.
Contrary to our expectations we found no increase in the release of AGRP-LI with the administration of orexin B from hypothalami of fed animals. This was surprising in view of the work of van den Pol et al. who found that arcuate nucleus neurons have nanomolar sensitivity to orexin and are capable of releasing GABA and glutamate from axons terminals adjacent to the AGRP-NPY-containing cell in response to orexin (28). Electron microscopy studies performed by Horvath et al. have also identified an abundance of presynaptic orexin-immunoreactive boutons abutting NPY-containing neurons (21). This latter observation would strongly suggest the presence of orexin receptors on the AGRP-NPY-containing neuron.
We also had anticipated that MCH might have an effect on hypothalamic AGRP-LI release because MCH projections from the lateral hypothalamus to the arcuate nucleus have previously been observed (22). However, it should be noted that the actual presence of MCH receptors on the AGRP-NPY-containing neuron has not, to our knowledge, been documented.
That m-CPP did not cause a change in hypothalamic AGRP-LI release in fasted rats was also somewhat unexpected. Because the hypophagic effect of serotonin is thought to be mediated by the serotonin 5HT1B/2C receptor, the observation that serotonin did not cause a change in AGRP-LI might be interpreted as consistent with the conflicting positive and negative effects of this biogenic amine on NPY release reported in the literature (17, 18). However, the lack of suppression of basal AGRP-LI release with the administration of the selective 5HT1B/2C agonist m-CPP could be construed as inconsistent with the data of Dryden et al. who observed a decrease in NPY levels in the PVN (which was presumed to reflect an effect of m-CPP on the AGRP-NPY-containing neuron in the arcuate nucleus) with sc or ip administration of that agent (18). Nonetheless, the in vivo model used in the latter study differs significantly from our perfusion model and, therefore, no firm conclusions can be drawn regarding this potential discrepancy.
Several possible explanations exist for the lack of change in AGRP-LI in response to orexin B, MCH and m-CPP. First we must acknowledge that the hypothalamic perfusion system itself might not be sensitive enough as a system to detect small changes in AGRP-LI release produced by these agents. However, if this is the case, an important corollary might be that orexin B, MCH, and m-CPP are relatively weak regulators of AGRP. We do not feel that the sensitivity of the RIA was an issue because the half-dose of AGRP (87 to 132) suggests that the assay should have been sensitive enough to detect reasonably small changes in AGRP-LI.
A second possibility is that when orexin, MCH, and m-CPP are applied to hypothalamic slices they stimulate neurons bearing their receptors in other hypothalamic nuclei. The summation response might not result in an observable change in AGRP-LI release.
A third possible explanation is that orexin B, MCH, and m-CPP do not directly affect the acute release of AGRP or NPY. Rather, it is possible that these agents act by modulating the membrane potential of the AGRP-NPY-containing neuron and by this mechanism determine the subsequent response of the AGRP-NPY-containing neuron to agents such as leptin. In this scenario, the effect of orexin B, MCH, and m-CPP on AGRP release would only be indirect and in our experimental model we would not observe a change in AGRP-LI release in response to of any of these three agents. A similar lack of observable effect would occur if orexin, MCH, and serotonin acted by regulating the transcription of AGRP mRNA and subsequently influencing the pool of AGRP available to be released under physiological conditions such as decreasing serum leptin levels.
Comparison of NPY and AGRP-LI release from hypothalamic slices Because AGRP and NPY are produced and released from the same arcuate nucleus neurons, we simultaneously examined AGRP-LI and NPY release from the perfused hypothalami of fed and fasted rats. Similar to AGRP-LI release, a continuous basal NPY release was observed in both the fed and fasted state (Figs. 2 and 6). NPY release was 80% greater from the hypothalami of 48 h fasted vs. fed animal (Figs. 2 and 6). An increase of NPY release from PVN of food deprived rats has previously been reported (29, 30). These latter studies suggest that the PVN is the predominant source of the NPY released from the perfused hypothalami in the present studies. Comparing the percent increase in NPY and AGRP-LI release that occurred in fasted animals reveals that NPY release increased to a lesser degree than AGRP-LI (80% vs. 216%). Similar to AGRP-LI release, NPY release from perfused hypothalami was inhibited by leptin and the time course of leptin-induced NPY suppression and recovery paralleled that of AGRP-LI (Figs. 3 and 7). However, leptin inhibition reached statistical significance sooner in the case of AGRP-LI release vs. NPY release (30 min vs. 40 min). In addition, comparing the maximal inhibition of AGRP-LI and NPY release by 10-6 M leptin reveals that NPY release was inhibited to a lesser extent than AGRP-LI release (33% vs. 95%). Although purely speculative, these data may indicate that leptin has a greater role in regulating AGRP release than NPY release and/or that leptin mediates its effects more through its regulation of AGRP release than through its regulation of NPY release. The last two statements should be viewed with caution because the physiological consequences of the relative percent increases or decreases in release of the two agents cannot be determined from the present studies.
Presence of AGRP-LI in adrenal tissue and serum Our studies indicate that the level of AGRP mRNA expression in adrenal tissue correlates well with the substantial stores of AGRP protein that we detected in that organ. On the basis of wet tissue weight the adrenal has approximately 16% of the AGRP protein observed in the hypothalamus of the fed rat.
Our chromatographic characterization of AGRP-LI suggests that AGRP is present in the systemic circulation at slightly less than nanomolar concentrations in the fed animal and increases to slightly more than one nanomolar in the 48 h fasted rat. However, the origin of serum AGRP-LI detected in our studies remains a crucial and unresolved question. Our adrenalectomy experiments indicate that adrenal AGRP is unlikely to be the source of serum AGRP-LI. The results of those experiments would also suggest that adrenal AGRP is likely to have an as yet unidentified paracrine role in adrenal physiology.
One potential source for serum AGRP-LI could be the hypothalamus. In the rat, AGRP-containing fibers have recently been noted to project from the arcuate nucleus through the median eminence to the posterior pituitary, where it conceivably could be released into the systemic circulation (7). In this regard, it is important to note that no compensatory increase in hypothalamic AGRP mRNA was seen in adrenalectomized animals. This is certainly consistent with the lack of change in the serum concentration of AGRP-LI observed in those animals. However, more direct studies would be required to conclude that hypothalamic AGRP actually reaches the systemic circulation.
Despite the fact that the origin of serum AGRP-LI is unclear, the levels of AGRP-LI observed in rat serum are potentially in a physiological range. Although purely speculative, AGRP in the bloodstream would likely function as a modulator of peripheral MCR activity in tissues such as the pancreas or gastrointestinal tract that contain receptors sensitive to its actions. The concentration of AGRP found in rat serum is close to the IC50 of AGRP (87 to 132) observed in our pharmacological studies of the cloned human MC3R (approximately 1 nanomolar) (6). However, AGRP (87 to 132) has a much lower affinity for the human MC5R, another peripherally expressed MCR that could be a potential target of serum AGRP. In this regard, we have not examined the binding affinity of AGRP at the rat MC3R and MC5R. Species differences in ligand binding affinity are not uncommon and the binding affinity of AGRP could be quite different at the rat receptors. The recent identification of the mahogany protein, which is postulated to be a low affinity receptor for agouti protein, may also have relevance for this discussion (31, 32). Whether mahogany protein or a similar molecule exists that functions to increase local concentrations of AGRP in peripheral tissues is presently unknown.
   Acknowledgments   We thank Achamyeleh Gebremariam for his assistance with the statistical analysis of the data and Xinyun Lu for helpful comments on the manuscript.
   Footnotes   1 This work was supported by NIH 1RO1-DK-54032 to 01 (to I.G.), NIH RO1-DK-47398 (to C.J.D.), and RO1-DK-28506 (to G.S.B) and funds from the University of Michigan Gastrointestinal Peptide Research Center (NIH Grant P30-DK-34933). This work was also supported by a Knoll Pharmaceutical Co. Weight Risk Investigators Study Council grant.
2 Associate Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
Received August 24, 1999.
   References Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Shutter JR, Graham M, Kinsey AC, Scully S, Luthy R, Stark KL 1997 Hypothalamic expression of ART, a novel gene related to agouti, is up-regulated in obese and diabetic mutant mice. Genes Dev 11:593 to 602[Abstract] Fong TM, Mao C, MacNeil T, Kalyani R, Smith T, Weinberg D, Tota MR, Van der Ploeg LHT 1997 ART as an antagonist of MC-3 and MC-4 receptors. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 237:629 to 631[CrossRef][Medline] Ollmann MM, Wilson BD, Yang Y-K, Kerns JA, Chen Y, Gantz I, Barsh GS 1997 Antagonism of central melanocortin receptors in vitro and in vivo by agouti-related protein. Science 278:135 to 138[Abstract/Free Full Text] Hahn TM, Breininger JF, Baskin DG, Schwartz MW 1998 Coexpression of AGRP and NPY in fasting-activated hypothalamic neurons. Nature Neurosci 1:271 to 272[CrossRef][Medline] Rossi M, Kim MS, Morgan DGA, Small CJ, Edwards CMB, Sunter D, Abusnana S, Goldstone AP, Russell SH, Stanley SA, Smith DM, Yagaloff K, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR 1998 A C-terminal fragment of Agouti-related protein increases feeding and antagonizes the effect of alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone in vivo. Endocrinology 139:4428 to 4431[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yang Y-K, Thompson D, Dickinson CJ, Wilken J, Barsh GS, Kent SBH, Gantz I 1999 Biological activities of chemically synthesized variants of agouti-related protein. Mol Endocrinol 13:148 to 155[Abstract/Free Full Text] Wilson BD, Bagnol D, Kaelin CB, Ollmann MM, Gantz I, Watson SJ, Barsh GS 1999 Physiological and anatomical circuitry between Agouti-related protein and leptin signaling. Endocrinology 140:2387 to 2397[Abstract/Free Full Text] Huszar D, Lynch CA, Fairchild-Huntress V, Dunmore J H, Fang, Q, Berkemeier LR, Gu W, Kesterson RA, Boston BA, Cone RD, Smith, FJ, Campfield LA, Burn P, Lee F 1997 Targeted disruption of the MC4R results in obesity in mice. Cell 88:131 to 141[Medline] Yeo GSH, Farooqi IS, Aminian S, Halsall DJ, Stanhope RG, O Rahilly S 1998 A frameshift mutation in the MC4R associated with dominantly inherited human obesity. Nat Genet 20:111 to 112[CrossRef][Medline] Vaisse C, Clement K, Guy-Grand B, Froguel P 1998 A frameshift mutation in human MC4R is associated with a dominant form of obesity. Nat Genet 20:113 to 114[CrossRef][Medline] Bagnol D, Lu X-Y, Kailin CB, Day HEW, Ollmann M, Gantz I, Akil H, Barsh GS, Watson SJ 1999 Anatomy of an endogenous antagonist:relationship between AGRP and POMC in brain. J Neurosci 19:RC26 (1 to 7) Mizuno TM, Mobbs CV 1999 Hypothalamic agouti-related protein messenger RNA is inhibited by leptin and stimulated by fasting. Endocrinology 140:814 to 817[Abstract/Free Full Text] Stephens TW, Basinski M, Bristo PK, Bue-Valleskey JM, Burgett SG, Craft L, Hale J, Hoffmann J, Hsiung HM, Kriauciunas A, MacKellar W, Rosteck Jr PR, Schoner B, Smith D, Tinsley FC, Zhang X-Y, Heiman M 1995 The role of neuropeptide Y in the antiobesity action of the obese gene product. Nature 377:530 to 532[CrossRef][Medline] Xu B, Dube MG, Kalra PS, Farmerie WG, Kaibara A, Moldawer LL, Martin D, Kalra SP 1998 Anorectic effects of the cytokine, ciliary neurotropic factor, are mediated by hypothalamic neuropeptide Y: comparison with leptin. Endocrinology 139:466 to 473[Abstract/Free Full Text] Lee J, Morris MJ 1998 Modulation of NPY overflow by leptin in the rat hypothalamus, cerebral cortex and medulla. NeuroReport 9:1575 to 1580[Medline] Beck B, Kozak R, Stricker-Krongrad A, Burlet C 1998 Neuropeptide Y release in the paraventricular nucleus of Long-Evans rats treated with leptin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 242:636 to 639[CrossRef][Medline] Dryden S, Wang Q, Frankish HM, Pickavance L, Williams G 1995 The 5HT antagonist methysergide increases NPY synthesis and secretion in the hypothalamus of the rat. Brain Res 699:12 to 18[CrossRef][Medline] Dryden S, Wang Q, Frankish, HM, Williams G 1996 Differential effects of the 5-HT1B/2C receptor agonist mCPP and the 5-HT1A agonist flesinoxan on hypothalamic NPY in the rat: evidence that NPY may mediate serotonin s effects on food intake. Peptides 17:943 to 949[CrossRef][Medline] Elias CF, Saper CB, Maratos-Flier E, Tritos NA, Lee C, Kelly J, Tatro JB, Hoffman GE, Ollmann MM, Barsh GS, Sakurai T, Yanagisawa M, Elmquist JK 1998 Chemically defined projections linking the mediobasal hypothalamus and the lateral hypothalamic area. J Comp Neurol 402:442 to 4593.0.CO;2-R 4743.0.CO;2-S 1087[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bittencourt JC, Presse F, Arias C, Peto C, Vaughan J, Nahon J-L, Vale W, Sawchenko PE 1992 The melanin-concentrating hormone system of the rat brain: an immuno- and hybridization histochemical characterization. J Comp Neurol 319:218 to 245[Medline] Gantz I, Konda Y, Tashiro T, Shimoto Y, Miwa H, Munzert G, Watson SJ, DelValle J, Yamada T 1993 Molecular cloning of a novel MCR. J Biol Chem 268:8248 to 8250 Griffon N, Mignon V, Facchinetti P, Diaz J, Schwartz J-C, Sokoloff P 1994 Molecular cloning and characterization of the rat fifth melanocortin receptor. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 200:1007 to 1014[CrossRef][Medline] Chen W, Kelly MA, Opitz-Araya X, Thomas RE, Low MJ, Cone RD 1997 Exocrine gland dysfunction in MC5R-deficient mice: evidence for coordinated regulation of exocrine gland function by melanocortin peptides. Cell 91:789 to 798[Medline] Lucas LR, Pompei P, Ono J, McEwen BS 1998 Effects of adrenal steroids on basal ganglia neuropeptide mRNA and tyrosine hydroxylase radioimmunoreactive levels in the adrenalectomized rat. J Neurochem 71:833 to 843[Medline] Harrold JA, Williams G, Widdowson PS 1999 Changes in hypothalamic AGRP but not -MSH or POMC concentrations in dietary-obese and food-restricted rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 258:574 to 577[CrossRef][Medline] van den Pol AN, Gao X-B, Obrietan K, Kilduff TS, Belousov AG 1998 Presynaptic and postsynaptic actions and modulation of neuroendocrine neurons by a new hypothalamic peptide, hypocretin/orexin. J Neurosci 18:7962 to 7971[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kalra SP, Dube MG, Sahu A, Phelps CP, Kalra PS 1991 Neuropeptide Y secretion increases in the paraventricular nucleus in association with increased appetite for food. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:10931 to 10935[Abstract] Dube MG, Sahu A, Kalra PS, Kalra SP 1992 Neuropeptide Y release is elevated from the microdissected paraventricular nucleus of food-deprived rats: an in vitro study. Endocrinology 131:684 to 688[Abstract] Nagle DL, McGrail SH, Vitale J, Woolf EA, Durssalt Jr BJ, DiRocco L, Holmgren L, Montagno J, Bork P, Huszar D, Fairchild-Huntress V, Ge P, Keilty J, Ebeling C, Baldini L, Gilchrist J, Burn P, Carlson GA, Moore KJ 1999 The mahogany protein is a receptor involved in suppression of obesity. Nature 398:148 to 152[CrossRef][Medline] Gunn TM, Miller KA, He L, Hyman RW, Davis RW, Azarani A, Schlossman SF, Duke-Cohan JS, Barsh GS 1999 The mouse mahogany locus encodes a transmembrane form of human attractin. Nature 398:152 to 156[CrossRef][Medline]
