Combined Blockade of Both  micro- and -Opioid Receptors Prevents the Acute Orexigenic Action of Agouti-Related Protein S. Brugman, D. J. Clegg, S. C. Woods and R. J. Seeley
Department of Animal Physiology (S.B.), University of Groningen, 9750 AA, Haren, Groningen, The Netherlands; and Department of Psychiatry (D.J.C., S.C.W., R.J.S.), University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Randy J. Seeley, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0559. E-mail: randy.seeley{at}uc.edu' + u + '@' + d + ''//-->.
   Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Agouti-related protein (AgRP) is an endogenous antagonist at the melanocortin 3 and 4 receptor in the hypothalamus. Central administration of AgRP produces a robust increase in food intake, and this effect can be blocked by administration of nonspecific opioid receptor antagonist. Such results implicate opioid receptors as critical to mediating the effects of AgRP. To determine which opioid receptor subtype is critical, we first determined the highest i3vt (administered into the third ventricle) dose of two specific opioid antagonists, nor-Binaltorphine or ss-funaltrexamine, that did not influence food intake on their own. Then, rats were pretreated with either of these two antagonists before i3vt AgRP and access to a high-fat diet. For neither the - nor the  micro-specific antagonist was there any effect to block the effects of AgRP on food intake. However, administration of both the - and  micro-receptor antagonists does significantly reduce the effect of AgRP. The current results implicate opioid receptors as critical downstream mediators of the potent effects of AgRP to increase food intake but indicate that either  micro- or -receptor activation is sufficient for AgRP s effect.
   Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   CONSIDERABLE EVIDENCE LINKS the central nervous system (CNS) melanocortin (MC) system to the control of food intake and body weight (1, 2). The MCs are a family of peptides that include -, ss-, and -MSH and ACTH. -MSH is an agonist at both the MC3 and 4 receptors, and central administration of -MSH or synthetic analogs, such as MTII, reduce food intake and body weight (3, 4). A unique feature of the MC system is that, in addition to the well-documented role for endogenous agonists, there is also an important role for endogenous antagonists for the various MC receptors. The first antagonist described in the MC system was agouti signaling protein (ASP). ASP acts in the periphery to alter MC1 receptor signaling to regulate peripheral skin and hair color (5). Overexpression of ASP results in a yellow coat color via the MC1 receptor (6). Overexpression of ASP also results in increased food intake and obesity via interaction with MC3 and 4 receptors in the CNS (4).
Given that ASP is not normally found in the CNS, a role for ASP in regulating MC receptor signaling in the brain is unlikely. However, a homolog of ASP termed agouti-related protein (AgRP) is made in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus in a population of neurons adjacent, but not overlapping, with neurons that produce -MSH (7, 8, 9). AgRP acts as an antagonist at the MC3 and MC4 receptors (7, 10). Hence, AgRP opposes the actions of -MSH. Consistent with this, AgRP and the -MSH precursor, proopiomelanocortin, are regulated in opposite directions by energy balance and leptin. Food deprivation decreases proopiomelanocortin gene expression, whereas it increases AgRP gene expression in the arcuate nucleus (11, 12, 13). Overexpression of AgRP results in an obese phenotype similar to that of mice that overexpress ASP (10).
When a biologically active fragment of AgRP is administered into the third ventricle (i3vt) of rats, the increase of food intake lasts for up to 6 d (14, 15). Although the short-term effects of AgRP seem to depend on antagonism at the identified MC receptors, the long-term effects do not (14). Moreover, like neuropeptide Y (NPY), the orexigenic effect of AgRP can be blocked by the nonspecific opioid receptor antagonist naloxone (16, 17). Thus, the potent effects of AgRP to increase food intake depend critically on activation of opioid receptors. Opioid receptors come in three identified subtypes:  micro, , and (18); and of these, both  micro and have been strongly implicated in the control of food intake (19). Thus, the aim of these experiments was to assess the role of these specific opioid receptor subtypes in mediating the effects of AgRP to increase food intake.
   Materials and Methods Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Animals Male Long-Evans rats (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN, for experiment 1; Taconic Farms, Inc. Germantown, NY, for experiment 2), weighing 350 to 450 g at the onset of the experiments, were individually housed and maintained in a temperature-controlled (21  plus or minus  1 C) room with a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle. A total of 60 rats were used.
Surgery A guide sleeve [Plastics One Guide (22 G, catalog no. C313G)] and obdurator (18 G, catalog no. C313 DC), aimed at the third cerebral ventricle, were implanted. Coordinates were on the midline, 2.2 mm posterior to bregma and 7.5 mm ventral to dura, with bregma and at the same vertical coordinates (Paxinos and Watson, 1986). After a minimum of 10 d of recovery, accuracy of placement was verified by injection (i3vt) of 10 ng angiotensin in saline through an injector inserted into the guide sleeve. Only rats that drank 5 ml or more in the hour after injection were used in the experiments.
Chemicals AgRP(83 to 132) was purchased from Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Belmont, CA). Nor-Binaltorphimine (NorBNI) hydrochloride and ss-funaltrexamine (ss-FNA) hydrochloride were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). NorBNI has been widely used as a selective antagonist for -opioid receptors (20, 21), and ss-FNA has been widely used as a selective  micro-opioid receptor antagonist (18, 22). The selective antagonist action of ss-FNA has a unique time course, becoming more selective for this action over an apparent 20 h after administration (23). Thus, for all of the experiments, ss-FNA is actually administered 20 h before food intake measurements. AgRP was dissolved in physiological saline, which served as the control solution. NorBNI and ss-FNA were dissolved in 100% methanol that served as their control solution. All solutions were administered i3vt in a 2- microl vol.
Feeding schedule The animals had access to a high-fat (HF), modified AIN-93M-purified, pelleted rodent diet (Dyets, Inc., Bethlehem, PA; see Table 1 for diet composition) for 2 h each day, starting at lights-off. For the remaining 22 h, the rats had access to pelleted laboratory chow (Harlan-Teklad, Indianapolis, IN). This paradigm was used because it produces very reliable 2-h intakes and because both AgRP and the ligands of the opioid receptors potently influence intake of a preferred HF diet more than other diets (24). Consequently, if opioids are important in mediating the effects of AgRP, it is more likely to be observed during HF feeding than alternative paradigms. Water was available ad libitum. Body weights and baseline food intake were measured throughout the experiment.
View this table:    Table 1. Macronutrient composition of pelleted rodent chow and HF diet
  Experiment 1: dose response determination for the -opioid receptor antagonist The first goal was to determine a subthreshold dose for each of the opioid antagonists for use in subsequent experiments. To that end, we focused on the low end of the dose-effect curve to accurately determine the highest dose of NorBNI that was clearly subthreshold (i.e. had no effect on food intake on its own). Four groups of naive rats (n = 5 or 6/group) were administered NorBNI, i3vt, 1 h before the presentation of the HF diet, at 0, 1, 5, or 10 nmol, and subsequent consumption of the HF diet and chow were measured. Data were analyzed by a one-way ANOVA, followed by Dunnet s t tests, to compare each dose with the vehicle control.
Experiment 2: dose response determination for the  micro-opioid receptor antagonist Rats from experiment 1 were used in experiment 2 after they had 7 d with no experimental manipulations and their baseline intakes and body weight had returned to normal (which occurred within 48 h). Analogous to experiment 1, we determined the i3vt dose-effect curve for the  micro- selective antagonist ss-FNA by administering 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 5 nmol doses, 20 h before access to the HF diet, and measuring subsequent HF and chow consumption. Data were analyzed by a one-way ANOVA, followed by Dunnet s t tests, to compare each dose with the vehicle control.
Experiment 3: effect of NorBNI on AgRP(83 to 132)-induced food intake On each experimental day, rats received two i3vt injections. The first occurred 1 h before the second and contained NorBNI at the highest subthreshold dose determined in experiment 1 or vehicle. The second injection contained either saline or AgRP (1 nmol). The second injection occurred 30 min before lights off, and therefore, 30 min before access to the HF diet. Each rat (n = 22) was tested twice, 7 d apart, in two of the four conditions: 1) methanol + saline; 2) NorBNI (5 nmol) + saline; 3) methanol + AgRP (1 nmol); or 4) NorBNI (5 nmol) + AgRP (1 nmol). In this 2 x 2 design, AgRP vs. saline was a within-subjects factor, whereas NorBNI vs. methanol was a between-subjects factor with condition order counterbalanced across subjects. Food intake was measured every 30 min during access to the HF diet. After 2 h, the HF diet was replaced with chow, and chow intake was recorded over the remaining 22 h, and data were analyzed using a mixed-model ANOVA followed by Tukey s post hoc tests.
Experiment 4: effect of ss-FNA on AgRP(83 to 132)-induced food intake Experiment 4 used a separate group of naive animals (n = 18) in a design that exactly parallels experiment 3 except that the selective opioid antagonist ss-FNA, at the maximally subthreshold dose determined from experiment 2 (0.1 nmol), or methanol was given 20 h before AgRP or saline administration. Again, food intake was measured every 30 min during access to the HF diet. After 2 h, the HF diet was replaced with chow, and chow intake was recorded over the remaining 22 h, and data were analyzed using a mixed-model ANOVA followed by Tukey s post hoc tests.
Experiment 5: effect of combined NorBNI and ss-FNA on AgRP(83 to 132)-induced food intake The goal was to determine whether combined blockade of both the  micro- and -opioid receptors attenuates AgRP-induced food intake. Rats from experiment 3 and experiment 4 were used in this experiment after at least 7 d rest and food intake and body weight had returned to baseline levels. On the test day, animals received three separate injections. Twenty hours before receiving either AgRP or saline, rats received an injection of either methanol or ss-FNA (0.1 nmol). Methanol or NorBNI (5 nmol) was then injected 1 h before the final injection of saline or AgRP (1 nmol). At lights off, animals were given access to the HF diet for 2 h. Food intake was measured every 30 min. After 2 h, the HF diet was replaced with chow, and chow intake was measured over the remaining 22 h. Each animal was run in only one condition (n = 6 or 7/group) Data were analyzed by a two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey s post hoc tests.
   Results Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Experiment 1: effect of NorBNI on food intake The dose-effect curve for NorBNI is depicted in Fig. 1. The one-way ANOVA on 2 h cumulative intake was significant [F(3, 18) = 3.211 P  <  0.05]. Injection of 10 nmol NorBNI significantly reduced intake of the HF diet during the first 2 h of the dark phase, compared with vehicle (P  <  0.05). The total 2-h intake is representative of the intake at earlier times (data not shown). The 5-nmol dose had no reliable effect on 2-h intake and was therefore the highest subthreshold dose for use in subsequent experiments (see Fig. 1). No dose of NorBNI reduced chow intake over the subsequent 22 h (data not shown). In all of our experiments, methanol was used as the vehicle. Under some conditions, methanol has been shown to be toxic to neurons. To determine whether methanol could independently influence food intake in our rats, we compared the food intake on the day before the beginning of the injections to the methanol-alone condition. On the methanol-alone day, rats ate 13.8  plus or minus  0.96 g; whereas, on the noninjection day, rats consumed 14.2  plus or minus  1.1 g (P  >  0.05, paired-sample t test), indicating that, in this paradigm, methanol alone did not have a significant effect on intake.
View larger version (19K):    Figure 1. Mean 2-h intake of the HF diet after various doses of NorBNI. *, P  <  0.05, compared with vehicle treatment.
  Experiment 2: effect of ss-FNA on food intake The dose-effect curve for ss-FNA is depicted in Fig. 2. The one-way ANOVA on 2-h cumulative intake was significant [F(3, 18) = 3.334 P  <  0.05], and post hoc analyses revealed that injection of 1 nmol ss-FNA significantly suppressed 2-h intake of the HF diet, compared with vehicle (P  <  0.05,). There was a nonsignificant trend (P = 0.06) for the 0.5-nmol dose to inhibit food intake (see Fig. 2). Consequently, we chose to use 0.1 nmol as the highest, clearly subthreshold dose for further experiments. Chow intake over the following 22 h was not reduced by any dose of ss-FNA.
View larger version (16K):    Figure 2. Mean 2-h intake of the HF diet after various doses of ss-FNA. *, P  <  0.05, compared with vehicle treatment.
  Experiment 3: effect of NorBNI on AgRP(83 to 132)-induced food intake As has been previously reported (17), AgRP significantly increased intake of both the HF diet [F(1, 16) = 8.02, P  >  0.01, see Fig. 3] and the subsequent chow intake (data not shown). There was no effect of NorBNI to influence food intake [F(1, 16) = 1.3, P  >  0.05], nor was there a significant interaction between AgRP and NorBNI [F(1, 16) = 0.72, P  >  0.05, see Fig. 3]. Thus, unlike subthreshold doses of the nonspecific opioid antagonist naloxone, NorBNI did not reduce AgRP s orexigenic effect at 2 h. It should be noted that the baseline food intakes (both on uninjected days and on the vehicle-injected days) are lower in experiments 3, 4, and 5 than in experiments 1 and 2. Experiments 3, 4, and 5 were all run during the summer months, when both the ambient temperature and ambient humidity are higher than in February, when experiments 1 and 2 were run. Despite the vivarium being both temperature and humidity controlled, we have observed in other experiments that the animal rooms do have higher levels of humidity during the summer and that this reduces consumption of the HF diet. Importantly, the dose of NorBNI that we determined to be subthreshold in experiment 1 remained subthreshold in experiment 3 despite the lower baseline food intakes.
View larger version (23K):    Figure 3. Mean 2-h intake of the HF diet after i3vt AgRP or vehicle after pretreatment with a subthreshold dose (5 nmol) of the -selective opioid receptor antagonist NorBNI. *, P  <  0.05, compared with the vehicle/vehicle condition.
  Experiment 4: effect of ss-FNA on AgRP(83 to 132)-induced food intake Similar to what occurred in experiment 3, AgRP significantly increased intake of both the HF diet [see Fig. 4, F(1, 14) = 10.29, P  <  0.01] and the subsequent chow intake (data not shown). ss-FNA did not alter food intake on its own [F(1, 14) = 2.5  >  0.1], nor did it alter this increase in 2-h food intake caused by AgRP [see Fig. 4, interaction F(1, 14) = 0.04, P  <  0.8], nor did it act to alter the AgRP effect at any other time point (data not shown). Thus, unlike subthreshold doses of the nonspecific antagonist naloxone, ss-FNA did not reduce AgRP s orexigenic effect.
View larger version (25K):    Figure 4. Mean 2-h intake of the HF diet after i3vt AgRP or vehicle after pretreatment with a subthreshold dose (0.1 nmol) of the  micro-selective opioid receptor antagonist ss-FNA. *, P  <  0.05, compared with the vehicle/vehicle condition.
  Experiment 5: effect of combined NorBNI and ss-FNA on AgRP(83 to 132)-induced food intake Vehicle-treated rats (two methanol injections and one saline injection) showed normal 2-h food consumption that was comparable with the baseline food intake in all of the other experiments, indicating that this more complicated procedure was not stressful to these well-handled animals. As was observed in experiments 3 and 4, AgRP significantly increased both HF diet [F(1, 17) = 7.00, P = 0.02, see Fig. 5] and chow intake (data not shown), compared with the baseline condition. The combined administration of NorBNI and ss-FNA significantly attenuated the effect of AgRP to increase intake of the HF diet [interaction, F(1, 17) = 7.47, P = 0.01, see Fig. 5]. Importantly, this occurred despite the fact that the combined administration of the two opioid receptor antagonists at these doses had no effect on food intake in the absence of AgRP [F(1, 17) = 3.67, P  >  0.05]. The effect of AgRP to increase 22-h chow intake was not altered by the combined opioid receptor antagonists (data not shown).
View larger version (23K):    Figure 5. Mean 2-h intake of the HF diet after i3vt AgRP or vehicle after pretreatment with subthreshold doses of combined NorBNI and ss-FNA. *, P  <  0.05, compared with the vehicle/vehicle treatment.
     Discussion Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   AgRP(83 to 132), i3vt, elicits a robust increase in food intake that lasts for as long as 6 d (14). We have previously reported that a subthreshold dose of the general opioid receptor antagonist naloxone, injected simultaneously with AgRP, could attenuate the acute hyperphagic effect without altering the unique long-term effects of AgRP. These results implicate opioid receptor activation in mediating the ability of AgRP to acutely increase food intake (17). The current data extend those results in an interesting and not-anticipated way. Unlike the results with naloxone, the highest subthreshold doses of either the  micro- or the -selective antagonist alone did not reduce the ability of AgRP to increase intake. However, when  micro- and -antagonists were combined at doses that had no effect on food intake when administered without AgRP, they significantly attenuated the ability of AgRP to increase intake of the HF diet. Like naloxone, this effect is associated only with the acute effects of AgRP, and combined  micro- and - receptor antagonism could not block the long-term effects of AgRP.
These data are therefore consistent with the hypothesis that the acute effect of AgRP to increase food intake depends on activation of opioid receptors. However, these data also indicate that either  micro- or -opioid receptor activation is sufficient to mediate the effects of AgRP, such that only when both receptor subtypes are blocked does AgRP no longer activate critical aspects of CNS circuitry necessary to increase food intake acutely. This result is potentially analogous to NPY, where suprathreshold doses of either - and  micro- (but not -) receptor antagonists reduce the orexigenic effect of NPY (25). However, in those experiments, it was not determined whether combined - and  micro-receptor blockade would further inhibit NPY-induced feeding.
NPY and AgRP are largely colocalized within the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (8, 9, 26), and mRNA for both is elevated after fasting and also in ob/ob and db/db mice (27). Moreover, the acute effects of both NPY and AgRP are associated with recruitment of many of the same brain regions (28). Consequently, the current data extend the similarity between NPY and AgRP to include recruiting the same opioid receptor subtypes.
Several lines of evidence implicate the opioid system in the control of food intake (29). Microinjection experiments have identified numerous sites, at every level of the neuroaxis, in which opioid agonist and antagonists affect food intake (for review, see Ref. 30). In particular, whereas opioid agonists and antagonists increase and decrease food intake, respectively, they also influence food choice. Both - and  micro- selective antagonists have been found to decrease intake of an HF diet to a greater extent than they decrease intake of a high-carbohydrate diet (31). Controversy exists, however, as to whether the effect of opioids is to alter the animal s choice of macronutrients or simply to drive the organism to consume more of an already preferred food (32). Regardless of the interpretation, this is consistent with an important role for these opioid receptor subtypes in mediating the effects of AgRP. Similar to what occurs after manipulation of opioid receptor signaling, administration of AgRP selectively increases intake of a preferred HF diet (17). Additionally, stimulation of  micro-receptors in the nucleus accumbens preferentially enhances HF feeding (33). Such strong parallels between AgRP and opioid receptor ligands on food intake and food selection strengthen the hypothesis that these two systems interact in an important way to influence food intake and food choice.
The opioid system encompasses a number of distributed receptor populations as well as a number of endogenous ligands for those receptors. In these experiments, the opioid receptor antagonists were delivered into the third ventricle and, hence, close to the hypothalamus. However, given the lipophyllic nature of these compounds and the rostral- to-caudal flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the ventricular system, it is likely that these antagonists could interact with opioid receptors in a variety of neuroanatomical sites (34). Although these experiments, therefore, cannot determine the exact location of the critical  micro- and -opioid receptors, some clues can be derived from the areas that show increases in fos-like-immunoreactivity after third-ventricular administration of AgRP. Two hours after AgRP administration, fos is increased in the accumbens shell, lateral septum, and paraventricular and dorsomedial nuclei of the hypothalamus. After 24 h, fos is increased in the accumbens shell, lateral septum, central nucleus of the amygdala, lateral hypothalamus, and nucleus of the solitary tract (35). All of these regions show evidence for  micro- or -receptor binding and/or expression, but only the nucleus of the solitary tract and the lateral hypothalamus show high levels of binding for both receptors (33, 36, 37). Future research will need to address whether the activation of either  micro- or -receptor subtypes sufficient to produce AgRP s effects is in the same neuroanatomical sites or occurs as a result of activation in disparate sites.
A separate (but related) question is which endogenous opioid ligand or ligands that are blocked by the specific receptor antagonists have increased release after AgRP administration. The search for specific functions of opioid ligands has been hampered by the fact that they all interact with multiple subtypes of opioid receptors (20, 38) and the recent demonstration that opioid receptor subtypes can make heterodimers (39). Nevertheless, both ss-endorphin and dynorphin have high affinity for both  micro- and -opioid receptors (40, 41, 42), and ss-endorphin is made in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (43), in cells that have been hypothesized to express the MC3 receptor (44, 45) and in the nucleus of the solitary tract in a region of high MC4 receptor expression. Thus, it is possible that AgRP given into the third ventricle could exert direct effects on one or both of these ss-endorphin populations. Food intake stimulated by ss- endorphin can be significantly and dose-dependently attenuated by pretreatment with either the  micro- or the -selective antagonists (46, 47). As reported by Silva et al. (47), because the antagonists only worked at high equimolar doses, relative to ss-FNA, it is conceivable that they could be exerting their effects through multiple (rather than specific) opioid receptors. Because none of the antagonist doses used in the Silva study completely eliminated the ss-endorphin-induced feeding, they proposed that, analogous to our findings with AgRP, blockade of multiple opioid receptors might be necessary to produce this effect. Dynorphin is made both in the paraventricular nucleus and lateral area of the hypothalamus, and both regions express high levels of the MC4 receptor (48). Both our group and Berthoud and colleagues (35) have shown that the AgRP-induced fos in the lateral hypothalamus is colocalized with orexin-A immunoreactivity. Because dynorphin is heavily colocalized with orexin-A in the lateral hypothalamus (49), this provides direct evidence that AgRP can activate dynorphin-containing neurons. Use of either mice with targeted deletion of ss-endorphin (50, 51) or dynorphin could clarify the role of these two opioid peptides in the orexigenic actions of AgRP.
The exact role of the opioid system in the control of food intake remains uncertain. Given its large number of different receptors and ligands, however, it is likely that its role is not one-dimensional and, rather, encompasses a number of aspects of ingestive behavior (19). The present data point to a specific role for  micro- and -opioid receptors in mediating effects of the hypothalamic MC system. This intimate relationship with the MC system points to the long-term regulation of energy balance as one of the important roles played by the opioid system. Future research will need to address the functional interactions of the opioid system with hypothalamic peptides and also explore the potential involvement of the opioid system in the etiology and treatment of disorders of energy-balance regulation, such as obesity.
   Acknowledgments  
   Footnotes   This work was supported by funds from NIH (DK-54080, DK-17844, and DK-56863) and funds from Procter \|[amp ]\| Gamble (Cincinnati, OH).
Abbreviations: AgRP, Agouti-related protein; ASP, agouti signaling protein; CNS, central nervous system; ss-FNA, ss-funaltrexamine; HF, high-fat; i3vt, administered into the third ventricle; MC, melanocortin; NorBNI, nor-Binaltorphine; NPY, neuropeptide Y.
Received February 27, 2002.
Accepted for publication July 22, 2002.
   References Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Cone RD 1999 The central melanocortin system and energy homeostasis. Trends Endocrinol Metab 10:211 to 216[CrossRef][Medline] Benoit SC, Schwartz MW, Baskin DG, Woods SC, Seeley RJ 2000 CNS melanocortin system involvement in the regulation of food intake and body weight. Horm Behav 37:299 to 308[CrossRef][Medline] Thiele T, van DG, Yagaloff K, Fisher S, Schwartz M, Burn P, Seeley R 1998 Central infusion of melanocortin agonist MTII in rats: assessment of c-fos expression and taste aversion. Am J Physiol 274:R248 to R254 Fan W, Boston B, Kesterson R, Hruby V, Cone R 1997 Role of melanocortinergic neurons in feeding and the agouti obesity syndrome. Nature 385: 165 to 168 Cone RD, Lu D, Koppula S, Vage DI, Klungland H, Boston B, Chen W, Orth DN, Pouton C, Kesterson RA 1996 The melanocortin receptors: agonists, antagonists, and the hormonal control of pigmentation. Recent Prog Horm Res 51:287 to 320[Medline] Ollmann MM, Lamoreux ML, Wilson BD, Barsh GS 1998 Interaction of agouti protein with the melanocortin 1 receptor in vitro and in vivo. Genes Dev 12:316 to 330[Abstract/Free Full Text] Fong T, Mao C, MacNeil T, Kalyani R, Smith T, Weinberg D, Tota M, Van dPL 1997 ART (protein product of agouti-related transcript) as an antagonist of MC-3 and MC-4 receptors. Biochem Biophy Res Commun 237:629 to 631[CrossRef][Medline] Hahn TM, Breininger JF, Baskin DG, Schwartz MW 1998 Coexpression of Agrp and NPY in fasting-activated hypothalamic neurons. Nat Neurosci 1:271 to 272[CrossRef][Medline] Chen P, Li C, Haskell-Luevano C, Cone RD, Smith MS 1999 Altered expression of agouti-related protein and its colocalization with neuropeptide Y in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus during lactation. Endocrinology 140:2645 to 2650[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ollmann M, Wilson B, Yang Y, Kerns J, Chen Y, Gantz I, Barsh G 1997 Antagonism of central melanocortin receptors in vitro and in vivo by agouti-related protein. Science 278:135 to 138[Abstract/Free Full Text] Schwartz MW, Seeley RJ, Weigle DS, Burn P, Campfield LA, Baskin DG 1997 Leptin increases hypothalamic proopiomelanocortin (POMC) mRNA expression in the rostral arcuate nucleus. Diabetes 46:2119 to 2123[Abstract] Elias CF, Aschkenasi C, Lee C, Kelly J, Ahima RS, Bjorbaek C, Flier JS, Saper CB, Elmquist JK 1999 Leptin differentially regulates NPY and POMC neurons projecting to the lateral hypothalamic area. Neuron 23:775 to 786[CrossRef][Medline] Mizuno T, Kleopoulos S, Bergen H, Roberts J, Priest C, Mobbs C 1998 Hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin mRNA is reduced by fasting and in ob/ob and db/db mice, but is stimulated by leptin. Diabetes 47:294 to 297[Abstract] Hagan MM, Rushing PA, Pritchard LM, Schwartz MW, Strack AM, Van der Ploeg HT, Woods SC, Seeley RJ 2000 Long-term orexigenic effects of AgRP-(83 to 132) involve mechanisms other than melanocortin receptor blockade. Am J Physiol 279:R47 to R52 Rossi M, Kim M, Morgan D, Small C, Edwards C, Sunter D, Abusnana S, Goldstone A, Russell S, Stanley S, Smith D, Yagaloff K, Ghatei M, Bloom S 1998 A C-terminal fragment of agouti-related protein increases feeding and antagonizes the effect of -melanocyte stimulating hormone in vivo. Endocrinology 139:4428 to 4431[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kotz CM, Grace MK, Briggs J, Levine AS, Billington CJ 1995 Effects of opioid antagonists naloxone and naltrexone on neuropeptide Y-induced feeding and brown fat thermogenesis in the rat. Neural site of action. J Clin Invest 96: 163 to 170 Hagan MM, Rushing PA, Benoit SC, Woods SC, Seeley RJ 2001 Opioid receptor involvement in the effect of AgRP-(83 to 132) on food intake and food selection. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 280:R814 to R821 Schmidhammer H 1998 Opioid receptor antagonists. Prog Med Chem 35: 83 to 132 Glass MJ, Billington CJ, Levine AS 1999 Opioids and food intake: distributed functional neural pathways? Neuropeptides 33:360 to 368[CrossRef][Medline] Takemori AE, Ho BY, Naeseth JS, Portoghese PS 1988 Nor-Binaltorphimine, a highly selective -opioid antagonist in analgesic and receptor binding assays. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 246:255 to 258[Abstract] Levine AS, Grace M, Billington CJ, Portoghese PS 1990 Nor-Binaltorphimine decreases deprivation and opioid-induced feeding. Brain Res 534:60 to 64[CrossRef][Medline] Leventhal L, Kirkham TC, Cole JL, Bodnar RJ 1995 Selective actions of central  micro and opioid antagonists upon sucrose intake in sham-fed rats. Brain Res 685:205 to 210[CrossRef][Medline] Ward SJ, Portoghese PS, Takemori AE 1982 Pharmacological characterization in vivo of the novel opiate, ss-funaltrexamine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 220: 494 to 498 Koch JE, Bodnar RJ 1994 Selective alterations in macronutrient intake of food-deprived or glucoprivic rats by centrally-administered opioid receptor subtype antagonists in rats. Brain Res 657:191 to 201[CrossRef][Medline] Kotz CM, Grace MK, Billington CJ, Levine AS 1993 The effect of norbinaltorphimine, ss-funaltrexamine and naltrindole on NPY-induced feeding. Brain Res 631:325 to 328[CrossRef][Medline] Broberger C, De Lecea L, Sutcliffe JG, Hokfelt T 1998 Hypocretin/orexin- and melanin-concentrating hormone-expressing cells form distinct populations in the rodent lateral hypothalamus: relationship to the neuropeptide Y and agouti gene-related protein systems. J Comp Neurol 402:460 to 4743.0.CO;2-S 602[Abstract] Hagan MM, Benoit SC, Rushing PA, Pritchard LM, Woods SC, Seeley RJ 2001 Immediate and prolonged patterns of agouti-related peptide-(83 to 132)-induced c-fos activation in hypothalamic and extrahypothalamic sites. Endocrinology 142:1050 to 1056[Abstract/Free Full Text] Glass MJ, Billington CJ, Levine AS 1999 Opioids and food intake: distributed functional neuronal pathways? Neuropeptides 33:360 to 368[CrossRef][Medline] Glass MJ, Grace M, Cleary JP, Billington CJ, Levine AS 1996 Potency of naloxone s anorectic effect in rats is dependent on diet preference. Am J Physiol 271:R217 to R221 Islam AK, Bodnar RJ 1990 Selective opioid receptor antagonist effects upon intake of a high-fat diet in rats. Brain Res 508:293 to 296[CrossRef][Medline] Giraudo SQ, Grace MK, Billington CJ, Levine AS 1999 Differential effects of neuropeptide Y and the  micro-agonist DAMGO on  palatability  vs.  energy . Brain Res 834:160 to 163[CrossRef][Medline] Zhang M, Gosnell BA, Kelley AE 1998 Intake of high-fat food is selectively enhanced by  micro opioid receptor stimulation within the nucleus accumbens. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 285:908 to 914[Abstract/Free Full Text] Schroeder RL, Weinger MB, Vakassian L, Koob GF 1991 Methylnaloxonium diffuses out of the rat brain more slowly than naloxone after direct intracerebral injection. Neurosci Lett 121:173 to 177[CrossRef][Medline] Zheng H, Corkern M, Crousillac S, Patterson L, Phifer C, Berthoud H 2002 Neurochemical phenotype of hypothalamic neurons showing fos expression 23 hours following intracranial AgRP. Am J Physiol 282:R1773 to R1781 Mansour A, Fox CA, Burke S, Meng F, Thompson RC, Akil H, Watson SJ 1994  micro, , and opioid receptor mRNA expression in the rat CNS: an in situ hybridization study. J Comp Neurol 350:412 to 438[Medline] Mansour A, Fox CA, Thompson RC, Akil H, Watson SJ 1994  micro-Opioid receptor mRNA expression in the rat CNS: comparison to  micro-receptor binding. Brain Res 643:245 to 265[Medline] Rothman RB, Bykov V, Mahboubi A, Long JB, Jiang Q, Porreca F, de Costa BR, Jacobson AE, Rice KC, Holaday JW 1991 Interaction of ss-funaltrexamine with [3H]cycloFOXY binding in rat brain: further evidence that ss-FNA alkylates the opioid receptor complex. Synapse 8:86 to 99[Medline] Gomes I, Jordan BA, Gupta A, Trapaidze N, Nagy V, Devi LA 2000 Heterodimerization of  micro and opioid receptors: a role in opiate synergy. J Neurosci 20:RC110 Chang KJ, Cooper BR, Hazum E, Cuatrecasas P 1979 Multiple opiate receptors: different regional distribution in the brain and differential binding of opiates and opioid peptides. Mol Pharmacol 16:91 to 104[Abstract] Schulz R, Wuster M, Herz A 1979 Supersensitivity to opioids following the chronic blockade of endorphin action by naloxone. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 306:93 to 96[Medline] Akil H, Hewlett WA, Barchas JD, Li CH 1980 Binding of 3H-ss-endorphin to rat brain membranes: characterization of opiate properties and interaction with ACTH. Eur J Pharmacol 64:1 to 8[CrossRef][Medline] Watson SJ, Akil H, Richard 3rd CW, Barchas JD 1978 Evidence for two separate opiate peptide neuronal systems. Nature 275:226 to 228[Medline] Haskell-Luevano C, Chen P, Li C, Chang K, Smith MS, Cameron JL, Cone RD 1999 Characterization of the neuroanatomical distribution of agouti- related protein immunoreactivity in the rhesus monkey and the rat. Endocrinology 140:1408 to 1415[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bagnol D, Lu XY, Kaelin CB, Day HE, Ollmann M, Gantz I, Akil H, Barsh GS, Watson SJ 1999 Anatomy of an endogenous antagonist: relationship between agouti-related protein and proopiomelanocortin in brain. J Neurosci 19:RC26 Olson GA, Olson RD, Kastin AJ 1990 Endogenous opiates: 1989. Peptides 11:1277 to 1304[CrossRef][Medline] Silva RM, Hadjimarkou MM, Rossi GC, Pasternak GW, Bodnar RJ 2001 ss-Endorphin-induced feeding: pharmacological characterization using selective opioid antagonists and antisense probes in rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 297:590 to 596[Abstract/Free Full Text] Watson SJ, Khachaturian H, Taylor L, Fischli W, Goldstein A, Akil H 1983 Pro-dynorphin peptides are found in the same neurons throughout rat brain: immunocytochemical study. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80:891 to 894[Abstract] Chou TC, Lee CE, Lu J, Elmquist JK, Hara J, Willie JT, Beuckmann CT, Chemelli RM, Sakurai T, Yanagisawa M, Saper CB, Scammell TE 2001 Orexin (hypocretin) neurons contain dynorphin. J Neurosci 21:RC168 Rubinstein M, Mogil JS, Japon M, Chan EC, Allen RG, Low MJ 1996 Absence of opioid stress-induced analgesia in mice lacking ss-endorphin by site-directed mutagenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:3995 to 4000[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bernstein HG, Keilhoff G, Seidel B, Stanarius A, Huang PL, Fishman MC, Reiser M, Bogerts B, Wolf G 1998 Expression of hypothalamic peptides in mice lacking neuronal nitric oxide synthase: reduced ss-END immunoreactivity in the arcuate nucleus. Neuroendocrinology 68:403 to 411[CrossRef][Medline]
