Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Neurons Coexpress Orexin 1 Receptor Immunoreactivity and Receive Direct Contacts by Orexin Fibers Rebecca E. Campbell, Kevin L. Grove and M. Susan Smith
Department of Neuroscience (R.E.C., K.L.G., M.S.S.), Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, Oregon 97006; and Department of Physiology and Pharmacology (R.E.C., M.S.S.), Oregon Health Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Dr. M. Susan Smith, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health Science University, Beaverton, Oregon 97006. E-mail: smithsu{at}ohsu.edu' + u + '@' + d + ''//-->.
   Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   The orexins are produced in neurons of the lateral hypothalamic area and implicated in the regulation of both feeding and reproductive function. Orexins stimulate LH secretion in steroid-primed ovariectomized female rats and suppress LH secretion in nonprimed ovariectomized rats. The aim of the present study was to characterize the neuroanatomical pathway by which orexin might modulate LH secretion in the rat. Using double- and triple-label immunofluorescence coupled with confocal microscopy, we found that 75 to 85% of GnRH neurons were contacted by orexin fibers, and triple labeling with synaptophysin provided additional confirmation of close contacts. Furthermore, about 85% of GnRH neurons were colocalized with the orexin receptor 1 (OX-R1), and the OX-R1-expressing GnRH neurons were contacted by orexin terminals, providing the basis for a functional neuroanatomical pathway. GnRH nerve terminals in the median eminence, however, do not express OX-R1. An additional study investigated the coexpression of neuropeptide Y Y4-like receptors and orexin fibers in relation to GnRH neurons. There is evidence that Y4 receptor stimulation results in LH release, and studies from our laboratory show Y4-like immunoreactivity in the majority of orexin cell bodies in the lateral hypothalamic area and some orexin fibers scattered throughout the hypothalamus. The present study found that, although Y4-positive orexin fibers are in present in the area of GnRH neurons, they never come in close contact with GnRH neurons. Together, these data suggest that Y4 receptor modulation of LH release is likely to be indirect through orexin cell bodies and that orexin modulates GnRH neurons directly via OX-R1.
   Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   THE NEUROPEPTIDES OREXIN A and orexin B, also known as hypocretin-1 and hypocretin-2, have recently been characterized (1, 2) and implicated in the regulation of arousal states, energy metabolism, and neuroendocrine reproductive function (for reviews see Refs. 3, 4, 5). The peptides are derived from a common precursor, and their expression has been identified in neuronal cell bodies of the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA). Although orexin-expressing cell bodies are restricted to this area, they send widespread projections throughout the brain and spinal cord. Orexin actions are mediated via G protein-coupled receptors of two different subtypes (OX-R1 and OX-R2). OX-R2 is a nonselective receptor that binds both orexin A and B, and OX-R1 is highly selective for orexin-A (2). Complementary to the widespread projections of orexin fibers (6), OX-R1 and OX-R2 mRNA and protein have been found widely expressed in the brain (7, 8, 9, 10).
Recent physiological and neuroanatomical studies suggest that orexin A may play an important role in control of the hypothalamo-pituitary gonadal axis. For example, it has been shown that central administration of orexin A stimulates LH secretion (11). However, similar to other orexigenic peptides, such as neuropeptide Y (NPY), orexin has been shown to have bimodal effects on LH secretion, with orexin stimulating LH secretion in steroid-primed ovariectomized rats but inhibiting LH secretion in the absence of ovarian steroids (11, 12). It has also been demonstrated that immunoneutralization of orexin A in the brain completely abolishes both LH and PRL surges, but icv administration of orexin leads to a dose-dependent recovery of fasting-suppressed LH surges (13). In addition, tissue explant studies have shown that orexin A stimulates GnRH release from the hypothalamus of both intact male rats and female rats at proestrus (14). Recently a study employing low-dose estrogen replacement in ovariectomized rats, resulting in serum levels similar to those observed in diestrus, demonstrated that low-dose estrogen potentiates the suppressive effects of centrally administered orexin A on LH secretion (15), suggesting that orexin A is inhibitory during diestrus, or low estrogen states, and excitatory during surge conditions. Although orexin is clearly implicated in the regulation of GnRH/LH secretion, the neuroanatomical pathway by which orexin may be mediating its effects in the rat remains to be determined. The first aim of the present study was to investigate whether orexin fibers project to and come in close contact with GnRH neurons and whether GnRH neurons express OX-R1 in the rat.
Similar to orexin, NPY has been found to elicit bimodal effects on LH release, most likely acting through the Y1 (16, 17, 18), Y4 (17, 19, 20, 21), or Y5 (22, 23) receptor subtypes. Recently our laboratory reported that the majority of orexin cell bodies in the LHA expressed Y4-like immunoreactivity (Y4-ir), and some orexin fibers also were positive for Y4-ir (19). Others have shown that activation of Y4 receptors with a Y4 agonist, 1229U91, or a high-affinity ligand for the Y4 receptor, rat pancreatic polypeptide (rPP), stimulates GnRH neurons and in turn LH release in intact male rats (20) and is important in the basal release of LH in the female rat (17). Conversely, when the infertile, leptin-deficient ob/ob mouse is crossed with the Y4 knockout mouse, fertility is partially restored, suggesting the Y4 receptor is involved in suppressing reproductive function (21). Taken together, these data suggest that some of the effects of Y4 activation on LH release may be mediated via orexin. Therefore, the second aim of the present study was to characterize the neuroanatomical relationship between Y4-positive orexin fibers and GnRH neurons.
   Materials and Methods Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Animals and tissue Male and virgin cycling female rats (Simonsen Laboratories, Gilroy, CA) were housed individually and maintained under a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle (lights on at 0700 h) and constant temperature (23  plus or minus  2 C). Food and water were available ad libitum. All animal procedures were approved by the Oregon National Primate Research Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
For immunocytochemical studies, animals (n = 4 to 5, both male and female rats were used in each experiment) were killed under pentobarbital anesthesia by cardiac infusion with ice-cold PBS followed by ice-cold paraformaldehyde in NaPO4 buffer (pH 7.4). The brains were then removed, saturated in 25% sucrose, frozen in cooled isopentane, and stored at -80 C until sectioning on a microtome. A one-in-six series of tissue sections (25  microm) were collected from each animal.
Double- and triple-label immunofluorescence (IF) All immunofluorescent labeling, as previously reported (18, 22), was performed on floating sections. Double- and triple-label IF for orexin, GnRH, and one of synaptophysin, OX-R1, or Y4 were performed using a cocktail of primary antibodies. The goat polyclonal orexin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) was used at a concentration of 1:10,000 (19). The mouse monoclonal GnRH antibody (a kind gift of H. F. Urbanski, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, OR) was used at a concentration of 1:500 (22). The rabbit polyclonal synaptophysin antibody (DAKO Corp., Carpinteria, CA) was used at a concentration of 1:200. The rabbit polyclonal OX-R1 antibody (a kind gift of G. Hervieu, SmithKline Beecham Foods International, Harlow, Essex, UK) was used at a concentration of 1:500 (9, 24). The OX-R1 antibody has been extensively characterized and shown to be specific, as evidenced by the agreement in the patterns of receptor mRNA and protein expression (9), specific detection of the receptor in a cell line transfected with OX-R1 (9), and loss of specific staining following preabsorption of the antiserum with the immunogen peptide (24). The rabbit polyclonal Y4 antibody (a kind gift of J. ffrench-Mullen) was used at a 1:10,000 concentration (19). The specificity of this antibody was confirmed by showing similar expression patterns of the mRNA and protein, as determined by Western blot and IF. For each combination of double or triple labeling, all primary antibodies were titrated to establish the maximum dilutions that provided robust signals and minimum nonspecific staining.
First, double labeling for orexin and GnRH was performed. Briefly, floating tissue sections were removed from cryoprotectant and washed in 0.05 M potassium PBS (KPBS). Tissue was incubated in blocking buffer (KPBS + 0.4% Triton X-100 + 2% normal donkey serum) for 20 min to reduce background and then incubated in a cocktail of the orexin and GnRH primary antibodies for 48 h at 4 C. Following washes in KPBS, tissue was incubated for 1 h in a cocktail of fluorescent secondary antibodies. Orexin was visualized with tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC) conjugated to a donkey antigoat antibody (1:200, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA), and GnRH was visualized with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugated to a donkey antimouse antibody (1:200, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.).
Subsequently double labeling for GnRH and OX-R1 was performed. As in the previous experiment, GnRH was visualized with FITC conjugated to a donkey antimouse antibody (1:200), and OX-R1 was visualized with TRITC conjugated to a donkey antirabbit antibody (1:200, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.).
Triple-label experiments for GnRH/orexin/synaptophysin, GnRH/OX-R1/orexin, and GnRH/orexin/Y4 were carried out in a similar manner. In each triple-label experiment, GnRH was visualized with FITC conjugated to a donkey antimouse antibody (1:200). In the first triple-label experiment, orexin was visualized with TRITC conjugated to a donkey antigoat antibody (1:200), and synaptophysin was visualized with Cy5 conjugated to a donkey antirabbit antibody (1:200, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.). In the second triple-label experiment, OX-R1 was visualized with TRITC conjugated to a donkey antirabbit antibody (1:200), and orexin was visualized with Cy5 conjugated to a donkey antigoat antibody (1:200). The final triple-label experiment used Cy5 conjugated to a donkey antirabbit antibody (1:200) to visualize Y4 and TRITC conjugated to a donkey antigoat antibody (1:200) to visualize orexin. To enhance the signal for Y4-ir, the BLAST technique of biotinylated tyramide enhancement was used, as reported previously (18, 19). Sections from all experiments were mounted onto subbed slides, cover slipped with glycerol, and sealed.
Confocal laser microscopy Confocal laser microscopy, as previously described (18, 22), was used to analyze the double- and triple-label IF images for colocalization and close contacts. The TSC SP confocal system (Leica Corp., Germany), consisting of a RBE inverted microscope (Leica Corp., an Ar laser-producing light at 488 nm (for visualization of FITC), a Kr laser-producing light at 568 nm (for visualizing TRITC), and an HeNe laser-producing light at 647 nm (for visualization of Cy5), was used to scan the images. Various objectives (x25, numerical aperture 0.75 and x40, numerical aperture 1.25) were used to scan and capture images. For each experiment, fluorophore signals were checked individually for bleed-through to the apposing detector. All bleed-through was eliminated by adjusting laser intensity and detector window width. To assess colocalization of two signals, a series of continuous optical sections, 0.25  microm or 0.5  microm intervals along the z-axis of the tissue section, were scanned for each fluorescent signal. The signals were obtained for each fluorophore on one series of optical sections and stored separately as a series of 512 x 512 pixel images. The stacks of individual optical slices (0.25  microm or 0.5  microm resolution) were analyzed using the MetaMorph imaging system (Universal Imaging Corp., West Chester, PA) to determine colocalization and contacts. The confocal images are presented as projections of stacks of optical images or as individual slices, as indicated. The brightness and contrast of the images were adjusted in Photoshop to match microscope visualization (Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, CA).
Data analysis In the double-label IF studies for GnRH/orexin or GnRH/OX-R1, one series of tissue sections (10 to 12 sections, 150- microm interval between sections) was used from each animal (n = 4 to 5 animals). GnRH neurons were analyzed if the entire cell body, including proximal dendritic processes, was visible in the section. For the triple-label IF studies, representative sections from several animals were examined. These studies were performed primarily as a proof of principle, i.e. that GnRH neurons expressing the OX-R1 are contacted by orexin fibers (GnRH/OX-R1/orexin) or orexin contacts observed on GnRH neurons represent potential synaptic contacts (GnRH/orexin/synaptophysin). In the triple-label IF for GnRH/orexin/Y4, there were only a few scattered Y4-positive orexin fibers in the area of GnRH neurons.
   Results Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Double-label IF studies showed that orexin fibers (red) surrounded GnRH neurons (green) and made close contact with them (yellow color indicates colocalization, Fig. 1, A to C). Sections from four brains were analyzed (more than 500 GnRH neurons), and the results showed that between 75% and 85% of GnRH neurons in each brain were contacted by orexin fibers, and no differences were observed between male and female animals. Using synaptophysin (a protein localized in synaptic vesicles) as a marker of synaptic contacts, orexin fiber butons colocalized with synaptophysin and were associated with GnRH neurons (Fig. 1, D to F). Shown as a stack of images (D) or individual optical slices (0.25  microm resolution, E and F), the spine of an orexin fiber (red) colocalized with synaptophsyin (blue) makes close contact with a GnRH neuron (white represents triple labeling). Additional double-label studies showed that GnRH neurons colocalized with OX-R1-ir (indicated by the yellow color in the low- and high-power examples in Fig. 2, A and B). Consistent with the robust innervation of GnRH neurons by orexin, OX-R1-ir was colocalized in 85  plus or minus  2% of the GnRH neurons examined (485 neurons in five brains). Triple-label IF confirmed that orexin fibers, shown in blue, made contacts onto GnRH neurons expressing OX-R1-ir (Fig. 2, C and D).
View larger version (56K):    Figure 1. Orexin fibers come in close contact with GnRH neurons. A, A low-power fluorescent photomicrograph demonstrating GnRH neurons (green) surrounded by orexin fibers (red). Higher-power examples of individual GnRH neurons (B and C) show orexin fibers making close contact. Arrowheads indicate apparent close contacts (B and C), and the colocalization of pixels results in a yellow color. D, An example of an orexin fiber (red) spine (arrowhead), colocalized with synaptophysin (blue) that makes close contact with a GnRH cell body (green). The white pixels indicate triple-label overlap, and the yellow pixels indicate colocalization of red and green pixels. E and F, Serial 0.25- microm resolution optical slices demonstrating triple labeling (arrowhead). White scale bars: A, 50  microm; B to E, 25  microm.
  View larger version (69K):    Figure 2. GnRH neurons express OX-R1-ir and receive close contacts by orexin fibers. A, A low-power example of double-label IF of GnRH neurons (green) and OX-R1-expressing neurons (red) in the medial preoptic area of the hypothalamus. The yellow color indicates colocalization. B, A higher-power example of an OX-R1 expressing GnRH (green/yellow) neuron and a single-labeled OX-R1 neuron (red) is shown. C and D, Two representative examples of triple-label IF of GnRH neurons (green), expressing OX-R1-ir (single label, red; colocalization with GnRH, yellow). Orexin fibers (blue) make apparent close contacts to OX-R1-expressing regions of GnRH neurons as indicated by white arrows. The yellow arrow indicates an orexin fiber contact onto a single-label OX-R1 neuron (red). White scale bars: A, 50  microm; B to D, 25  microm.
  OX-R1 expression and orexin innervation were also investigated in the region of GnRH terminals in the median eminence (ME). As shown in Fig. 3, although there is some OX-R1 expression (red) in this region and orexin fibers do appear to innervate the dorsolateral ME (blue), there is no coexpression of OX-R1 and GnRH (green) and very little interaction between orexin fibers and GnRH nerve terminals.
View larger version (77K):    Figure 3. GnRH nerve terminals in the median eminence do not express OX-R1. A and B, Two representative images of triple-label IF for GnRH fibers (green), OX-R1 (red), and orexin fibers (blue) in the ME. No colocalization of OX-R1 and GnRH fibers is apparent, and orexin fibers have minimal interaction with GnRH nerve terminals. White scale bars, 25  microm.
  An additional triple-label study was carried out to investigate whether Y4-positive orexin fibers make close contacts with GnRH neurons. Only a few scattered Y4-positive orexin fibers were observed in the vicinity of GnRH cell bodies. Figure 4 depicts three GnRH cell bodies surrounded by orexin fibers. The white arrows indicate two fibers that are Y4/orexin positive. The yellow arrows indicate where orexin-positive fibers were identified coming in close contact with GnRH neurons. Although there were multiple close contacts between orexin fibers and GnRH, as shown previously in Fig. 1, Y4-positive orexin fibers never came in close contact with GnRH neurons.
View larger version (46K):    Figure 4. Y4-positive orexin-ir fibers are near GnRH neurons but do not make close contacts. Triple-label IF demonstrates GnRH neurons (green), surrounded by orexin fibers (red) and a few Y4-positive orexin double-label fibers (white, indicated by white arrows). It should be noted that Y4 expression in orexin fibers has been changed from its original color (magenta) to white to make it visible in the photographs. The "beaded" appearance of the Y4-positive orexin neurons may be exaggerated because of the BLAST technique to enhance Y4 staining, although a similar appearance is also observed in single-label orexin fibers (see Figs. 1 and 2). Orexin single-label fibers coming in close contact with GnRH neurons are indicated by the double-label yellow pixels and marked by yellow arrows. White scale bar, 25  microm.
     Discussion Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   The present study provides evidence for a functional neuroanatomical pathway between the orexin system and GnRH neurons in the rat, in that GnRH neurons express the OX-R1 and are contacted by orexin fibers (Figs. 1 and 2). There appears to be no interaction between orexin fibers and GnRH nerve terminals in the ME (Fig. 3). The immunoreactivity of orexin fibers and OX-R1 presented in the present study confirms previous findings demonstrating that orexin A immunoreactive fibers (6), OX-R1 mRNA (7), and immunoreactivity (9) are present in the septal and medial preoptic regions in which GnRH neurons are located. Our data support previously reported findings in the ovine hypothalamus, in which orexin fibers, originating from the LHA, were found in close contact with GnRH neurons (25). However, although the present study found between 75% and 85% of GnRH neurons contacted by orexin fibers and approximately 85% of GnRH neurons expressed OX-R1, the previous study found contacts on only 30% of GnRH neurons. This discrepancy between the two studies may be due to several things, including species differences between the rodent and sheep. If this is the case, it will be important to investigate orexin innervation of GnRH neurons in other species, especially the primate. Another discrepancy may be due to differences in the sensitivity of the antibodies used in the two studies, which were obtained from different sources. The present study shows dense networks of fine immunoreactive fibers (Figs. 1A and 4), but the orexin fibers demonstrated in the ovine hypothalamus (25) were much less dense. Yet another discrepancy might be due to differences in the sensitivity of the confocal microscopy analysis. It is generally accepted that, although confocal microscopy can provide a good approximation of synaptic interactions, the limitations of the technique preclude the degree of certainty obtained using electron microscopy.
Several lines of evidence support the contention that orexin A modulates neuroendocrine function. In addition to a number of studies indicating steroid-dependent effects of central orexin administration on LH release (11, 12, 15), studies using in vitro explants indicate that the stimulatory effects of orexin are at the hypothalamic level (14). It was also reported that orexin A stimulates GnRH release from hypothalamic explants collected from both male rats and female rats in proestrus. These data suggest that the stimulatory effects of orexin on LH release are via direct stimulation of GnRH secretion. Indeed, the present findings provide the functional neuroanatomical pathway by which orexin may stimulate GnRH neurons and subsequent LH release via direct contact with OX-R1 on GnRH cell bodies but not on nerve terminals within the ME. OX-R1 is exclusively coupled to the Gq/11 subtype of G proteins (5, 26), suggesting that orexin action via the OX-R1 on GnRH neurons is excitatory. However, orexin has also been shown to inhibit LH secretion in the absence of gonadal steroids (12), although the mechanism by which gonadal steroids modulate orexin effects on LH secretion remains to be determined. It is possible that the inhibitory actions of orexin on GnRH neurons is indirect, involving the activation of other neurons within the preoptic area that also express OX-R1 (Fig. 2), which in turn may have inhibitory actions on GnRH neurons.
As the name implies, orexin activity is necessary for normal feeding behavior. The central injection of orexin A stimulates food intake in satiated rats (27, 28), whereas neutralization of orexin with an antiorexin antibody dose dependently suppresses spontaneous feeding in fasted rats (29). Furthermore, orexin mRNA is increased with fasting (2). These data suggest that orexin neurons are able to sense the nutritional state of an animal. It has been shown repeatedly that changes in the metabolic status of an animal are tightly linked to changes in reproductive function. Therefore, the ability of orexin to modulate both feeding behavior and reproductive function, along with the present neuroanatomical findings, suggests that the orexin system is in a key position to serve as an integrating signal between energy balance and reproductive function.
In addition, orexin neurons are known to coexpress the long form of the leptin receptor (Ob-Rb) in rat (30) and sheep (25). Leptin, a peripheral metabolic signal released from adipocytes, is important in denoting adiposity and energy balance to the brain. Also, leptin has been shown to play a role in regulating reproductive function. Administration of leptin restores fasting-induced suppression of LH secretion in both sheep and primates (31, 32, 33). However, GnRH neurons do not express Ob-Rb. As previously suggested by similar findings in the ovine hypothalamus (25), direct projections by Ob-Rb-expressing orexin neurons to GnRH neurons may provide one potential neuroanatomical circuit by which leptin regulates GnRH activity.
NPY is another neuropeptide system that may be an important integrating signal for both energy balance/food intake and reproductive function (34). Similar to the effects of orexin, NPY also elicits steroid-dependent effects on LH secretion (35). Orexin neurons in the LHA receive direct synaptic contacts by NPY neurons projecting from the arcuate nucleus and in turn send reciprocal projections to arcuate nucleus NPY neurons (36). Currently, there is evidence implicating the Y1 (16, 17, 18), Y4 (17, 19, 20, 21), and Y5 (22, 23) receptor subtypes in NPY s modulation of neuroendocrine reproductive function. Of direct relevance, Y4-ir and mRNA are colocalized with orexin neurons in the LHA (19). These data, coupled with the present findings that GnRH neurons express the OX-R1 and are contacted by orexin fibers, demonstrate a unique potential neuronal circuit whereby NPY, acting through the Y4 receptor, can exert its effects on LH release via the modulation of orexin. Because the present study also showed that Y4-positive orexin fibers were never observed in close contact with GnRH neurons, the major actions of the Y4 receptor appear to be through postsynaptic effects on orexin cell bodies within the LHA. Taken together, these data suggest that orexin neurons, by receiving critical input via Y4 and leptin receptors, may provide an important link between the regulation of energy balance and reproductive function.
A number of questions remain concerning the modulatory effects of the Y4-orexin system on GnRH neurons. First, the endogenous ligand for the brain Y4 receptor is not clear. Is it NPY, which has a much lower affinity for the Y4 receptor (37), or other pancreatic polypeptide family ligands? Our recent study characterizing the expression of Y4-ir on orexin neurons also found that administration of rPP, an endogenous ligand of the Y4 receptor, induced robust cFos activation in orexin neurons (19). Furthermore, rPP stimulated a modest increase in food intake and a robust drinking response (19), which is similar to responses by orexin. These data suggest that stimulation of the Y4 receptor by rPP is excitatory to orexin neurons. However, the effects of Y4 on reproductive function have been shown to be both stimulatory (17, 20) and inhibitory (21). Similarly, the effects of orexin have been reported to be both stimulatory and inhibitory to reproductive function (11, 12, 13, 14, 15). Therefore, it is possible the actions of the Y4 receptor on the GnRH/LH axis are mediated via the orexin system.
In summary, these data provide neuroanatomical evidence for a direct link between the orexin system and GnRH neurons. These findings suggest that orexin plays a direct role in the neuroendocrine control of reproduction and may also be uniquely positioned to integrate signals associated with energy balance regulation. Additional studies will be necessary to establish the relative importance of this novel neuronal circuitry in the regulation of reproductive function during normal cyclicity as well as during metabolic changes.
   Footnotes   This work was supported by NIH Grants HD-14643, HD-18185, and RR-00163.
Abbreviations: FITC, Fluorescein isothiocyanate; IF, immunofluorescence; KPBS, potassium PBS; LHA, lateral hypothalamic area; ME, median eminence; NPY, neuropeptide Y; OX-R, orexin receptor; rPP, rat pancreatic polypeptide; TRITC, tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate; Y4-ir, Y4-like immunoreactivity.
Received September 11, 2002.
Accepted for publication January 6, 2003.
   References Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   De Lecea L, Kilduff TS, Peyron C, Gao X, Foye PE, Danielson PE, Fukuhara C, Battenberg EL, Gautvik VT, Bartlett 2nd FS, Frankel WN, van den Pol AN, Bloom FE, Gautvik KM, Sutcliffe JG 1998 The hypocretins: hypothalamus-specific peptides with neuroexcitatory activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:322 to 327[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sakurai T, Amemiya A, Ishii M, Matsuzaki I, Chemelli RM, Tanaka H, Williams SC, Richardson JA, Kozlowski GP, Wilson S, Arch JR, Buckingham RE, Haynes AC, Carr SA, Annan RS, McNulty DE, Liu WS, Terrett JA, Elshourbagy NA, Bergsma DJ, Yanagisawa M 1998 Orexins and orexin receptors: a family of hypothalamic neuropeptides and G protein-coupled receptors that regulate feeding behavior. Cell 92:573 to 585[Medline] Sakurai T 2002 Roles of orexins in regulation of feeding and wakefulness. Neuroreport 13:987 to 995[Medline] Sutcliffe JG, de Lecea L 2002 The hypocretins: setting the arousal threshold. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:339 to 349[CrossRef][Medline] Beuckmann CT, Yanagisawa M 2002 Orexins: from neuropeptides to energy homeostasis and sleep/wake regulation. J Mol Med 80:329 to 342[CrossRef][Medline] Peyron C, Tighe DK, van den Pol AN, de Lecea L, Heller HC, Sutcliffe JG, Kilduff TS 1998 Neurons containing hypocretin (orexin) project to multiple neuronal systems. J Neurosci 18:9996 to 10015[Abstract/Free Full Text] Trivedi P, Yu H, MacNeil DJ, Van der Ploeg LH, Guan XM 1998 Distribution of orexin receptor mRNA in the rat brain. FEBS Lett 438:71 to 75[CrossRef][Medline] Marcus JN, Aschkenasi CJ, Lee CE, Chemelli RM, Saper CB, Yanagisawa M, Elmquist JK 2001 Differential expression of orexin receptors 1 and 2 in the rat brain. J Comp Neurol 435:6 to 25[CrossRef][Medline] Hervieu GJ, Cluderay JE, Harrison DC, Roberts JC, Leslie RA 2001 Gene expression and protein distribution of the orexin-1 receptor in the rat brain and spinal cord. Neuroscience 103:777 to 797[CrossRef][Medline] Cluderay JE, Harrison DC, Hervieu GJ 2002 Protein distribution of the orexin-2 receptor in the rat central nervous system. Regul Pept 104:131 to 144[CrossRef][Medline] Pu S, Jain MR, Kalra PS, Kalra SP 1998 Orexins, a novel family of hypothalamic neuropeptides, modulate pituitary luteinizing hormone secretion in an ovarian steroid-dependent manner. Regul Pept 78:133 to 136[CrossRef][Medline] Tamura T, Irahara M, Tezuka M, Kiyokawa M, Aono T 1999 Orexins, orexigenic hypothalamic neuropeptides, suppress the pulsatile secretion of luteinizing hormone in ovariectomized female rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 264:759 to 762[CrossRef][Medline] Kohsaka A, Watanobe H, Kakizaki Y, Suda T, Schioth HB 2001 A significant participation of orexin-A, a potent orexigenic peptide, in the preovulatory luteinizing hormone and prolactin surges in the rat. Brain Res 898:166 to 170[CrossRef][Medline] Russell SH, Small CJ, Kennedy AR, Stanley SA, Seth A, Murphy KG, Taheri S, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR 2001 Orexin A interactions in the hypothalamo-pituitary gonadal axis. Endocrinology 142:5294 to 5302[Abstract/Free Full Text] Furuta M, Funabashi T, Kimura F 2002 Suppressive action of orexin A on pulsatile luteinizing hormone secretion is potentiated by a low dose of estrogen in ovariectomized rats. Neuroendocrinology 75:151 to 155[CrossRef][Medline] Leupen SM, Besecke LM, Levine JE 1997 Neuropeptide Y Y1-receptor stimulation is required for physiological amplification of preovulatory luteinizing hormone surges. Endocrinology 138:2735 to 2739[Abstract/Free Full Text] Jain MR, Pu S, Kalra PS, Kalra SP 1999 Evidence that stimulation of two modalities of pituitary luteinizing hormone release in ovarian steroid-primed ovariectomized rats may involve neuropeptide Y Y1 and Y4 receptors. Endocrinology 140:5171 to 5177[Abstract/Free Full Text] Li C, Chen P, Smith MS 1999 Morphological evidence for direct interaction between arcuate nucleus neuropeptide Y (NPY) neurons and gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons and the possible involvement of NPY Y1 receptors. Endocrinology 140:5382 to 5390[Abstract/Free Full Text] Campbell RE, Smith MS, Allen SE, Grayson BE, ffrench-Mullen J, Grove KL, Orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamic area express the Neuropeptide Y Y4 receptor and are activated by rat pancreatic polypeptide (rPP). J Neurosci, in press Raposinho PD, Broqua P, Hayward A, Akinsanya K, Galyean R, Schteingart C, Junien J, Aubert ML 2000 Stimulation of the gonadotropic axis by the neuropeptide Y receptor Y1 antagonist/Y4 agonist 1229U91 in the male rat. Neuroendocrinology 71:2 to 7[CrossRef][Medline] Sainsbury A, Schwarzer C, Couzens M, Jenkins A, Oakes SR, Ormandy CJ, Herzog H 2002 Y4 receptor knockout rescues fertility in ob/ob mice. Genes Dev 16:1077 to 1088[Abstract/Free Full Text] Campbell RE, ffrench-Mullen JM, Cowley MA, Smith MS, Grove KL 2001 Hypothalamic circuitry of neuropeptide Y regulation of neuroendocrine function and food intake via the Y5 receptor subtype. Neuroendocrinology 74:106 to 119[CrossRef][Medline] Raposinho PD, Broqua P, Pierroz DD, Hayward A, Dumont Y, Quirion R, Junien JL, Aubert ML 1999 Evidence that the inhibition of luteinizing hormone secretion by central administration of neuropeptide Y (NPY) in the rat is predominantly mediated by the NPY-Y5 receptor subtype. Endocrinology 140:4046 to 4055[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ba;ckberg M, Hervieu G, Wilson S, Meister B 2002 Orexin receptor-1 (OX-R1) immunoreactivity in chemically identified neurons of the hypothalamus: focus on orexin targets involved in control of food and water intake. Eur J Neurosci 15:315 to 328[CrossRef][Medline] Iqbal J, Pompolo S, Sakurai T, Clarke IJ 2001 Evidence that orexin-containing neurones provide direct input to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurones in the ovine hypothalamus. J Neuroendocrinol 13:1033 to 1041[CrossRef][Medline] Van den Pol AN, Gao XB, Obrietan K, Kilduff TS, Belousov AB 1998 Presynaptic and postsynaptic actions and modulation of neuroendocrine neurons by a new hypothalamic peptide, hypocretin/orexin. J Neurosci 18:7962 to 7971[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ida T, Nakahara K, Katayama T, Murakami N, Nakazato M 1999 Effect of lateral cerebroventricular injection of the appetite-stimulating neuropeptide, orexin and neuropeptide Y, on the various behavioral activities of rats. Brain Res 821:526 to 529[CrossRef][Medline] Haynes AC, Jackson B, Overend P, Buckingham RE, Wilson S, Tadayyon M, Arch JR 1999 Effects of single and chronic intracerebroventricular administration of the orexins on feeding in the rat. Peptides 20:1099 to 1105[CrossRef][Medline] Yamada H, Okumura T, Motomura W, Kobayashi Y, Kohgo Y 2000 Inhibition of food intake by central injection of anti-orexin antibody in fasted rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 267:527 to 531[CrossRef][Medline] Hakansson M, de Lecea L, Sutcliffe JG, Yanagisawa M, Meister B 1999 Leptin receptor- and STAT3-immunoreactivities in hypocretin/orexin neurones of the lateral hypothalamus. J Neuroendocrinol 11:653 to 663[CrossRef][Medline] Finn PD, Cunningham MJ, Pau KY, Spies HG, Clifton DK, Steiner RA 1998 The stimulatory effect of leptin on the neuroendocrine reproductive axis of the monkey. Endocrinology 139:4652 to 4662[Abstract/Free Full Text] Nagatani S, Guthikonda P, Thompson RC, Tsukamura H, Maeda KI, Foster DL 1998 Evidence for GnRH regulation by leptin: leptin administration prevents reduced pulsatile LH secretion during fasting. Neuroendocrinology 67:370 to 376[CrossRef][Medline] Nagatani S, Zeng Y, Keisler DH, Foster DL, Jaffe CA 2000 Leptin regulates pulsatile luteinizing hormone and growth hormone secretion in the sheep. Endocrinology 141:3965 to 3975[Abstract/Free Full Text] Smith MS, Grove KL 2002 Integration of the regulation of reproductive function and energy balance: lactation as a model. Front Neuroendocrinol 23:225 to 256[CrossRef][Medline] Kalra SP, Dube MG, Pu S, Horvath TL, Kalra PS 1999 Interacting appetite-regulating pathways in the hypothalamic regulation of body weight. Endocr Rev 20:68 to 100[Abstract/Free Full Text] Horvath TL, Diano S, van den Pol AN 1999 Synaptic interaction between hypocretin (orexin) and neuropeptide Y cells in the rodent and primate hypothalamus: a novel circuit implicated in metabolic and endocrine regulations. J Neurosci 19:1072 to 1087[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bard JA, Walker MW, Branchek TA, Weinshank RL 1995 Cloning and functional expression of a human Y4 subtype receptor for pancreatic polypeptide, neuropeptide Y, and peptide YY. J Biol Chem 270:26762 to 26765[Abstract/Free Full Text]
