Differential Roles for Cholecystokinin A Receptors in Energy Balance in Rats and Mice Sheng Bi, Karen A. Scott, Alan S. Kopin and Timothy H. Moran
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine (S.B., K.A.S., T.H.M.), Baltimore, Maryland 21205; and Molecular Pharmacology Research Center, Department of Medicine, Tufts-New England Medical Center (A.S.K.), Boston, Massachusetts 02111
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Dr. S. Bi, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720 Rutland Avenue, Ross 618, Baltimore, Maryland 21205. E-mail: sbi{at}jhmi.edu' + u + '@' + d + ''//-->.
   Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Although cholecystokinin A (CCK-A) receptors (CCK-AR) mediate the feeding inhibitory actions of CCK in both rats and mice, the absence of CCK-AR results in species-specific phenotypes. The lack of CCK-AR in Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima fatty (OLETF) rats results in hyperphagia and obesity. We have suggested that demonstrated increases in meal size and elevated levels of dorsomedial hypothalamic (DMH) neuropeptide Y (NPY) gene expression may contribute to this phenotype. In contrast to OLETF rats, CCK-AR to / to  mice have normal total daily food intake and do not develop obesity. To assess the basis underlying the different phenotypes in rats and mice lacking CCK-AR, we characterized meal patterns in CCK-AR to / to  mice and determined whether CCK-AR to / to  mice exhibited an alteration in DMH NPY gene expression. We demonstrate that although CCK-AR to / to  mice show a similar dysregulation in meal size as OLETF rats, they do not have an elevation in DMH NPY mRNA expression levels. In fact, intact mice have no CCK-AR in the DMH. Furthermore, in intact rats, NPY and CCK-AR are colocalized in DMH neurons, and parenchymal injection of CCK into the DMH reduces food intake and down-regulates DMH NPY mRNA expression. These results suggest that although CCK-AR plays a role in the mediation of CCK actions in the control of meal size in both rats and mice, CCK-AR seems to contribute to modulating DMH NPY levels only in rats. The deficit in CCK s action in the control of DMH NPY gene expression may play a major role in the obese phenotype in OLETF rats.
   Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   CHOLECYSTOKININ (CCK) IS a peptide that is found in both the brain and the gastrointestinal tract. CCK is released from the duodenum and jejunum in response to the intraluminal presence of nutrient-digestive products, and it has been proposed to serve a feedback function in the short-term control of food intake. Peripheral CCK administration reduces food intake in a dose-related manner across a range of experimental situations and in a variety of species (1, 2, 3, 4), and the actions of CCK in food intake are specific to a reduction in meal size (5). The feeding inhibitory effects of exogenously administered CCK appear to mimic a physiological role for endogenous CCK. Administration of CCK antagonists results in an increase in food intake (6, 7, 8, 9), and this increase is manifested as an increase in meal size (10, 11). The feeding inhibitory actions of both exogenously administered and endogenously released CCK are mediated through their interaction with CCK-A (or CCK-1) receptors (CCK-AR) (7).
Although the satiety actions of peripheral CCK are well characterized, a role for brain CCK in the control of food intake has been controversial. Initial work reported that continuous picomole infusions of CCK into the cerebral ventricles of sheep suppressed feeding (12), but results in rodent models have been mixed. Although some studies have identified feeding inhibitory actions of central ventricular CCK administration, issues of dosage and access to peripheral sites have been raised (13, 14). Recently, Blevins et al. demonstrated that infusing smaller doses of CCK-8 into specific brain sites resulted in site-specific feeding inhibitory actions in the rat (15), and this anorexic dose of CCK-8 did not increase plasma CCK-8 levels sufficiently to suppress feeding by a peripheral mechanism (16).
Recent data from Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima fatty (OLETF) rats (17), which have a 6.8-kb deletion of the CCK-AR gene resulting in the absence of CCK-AR (18), have suggested both peripheral and central roles for CCK acting through CCK-AR in the control of food intake (19). OLETF rats have a peripheral CCK satiety deficit. These rats have no feeding response to peripherally exogenous CCK administration (20). Consistent with the lack of an intact peripheral CCK satiety signaling, food intake in OLETF rats is characterized by significant and chronic increases in meal sizes. In response to this increase, meal number is decreased, but the decrease is not compensatory, and as a result, OLETF rats are hyperphagic (20). Although the increase in meal size in OLETF rats is consistent with the absence of peripheral CCK signaling, the overall hyperphagia and obesity were surprising. Pair-feeding OLETF rats to the intake of Long-Evans Tokushima Otsuka (LETO) control rats completely prevents their obesity, demonstrating that the increased body weight is secondary to the hyperphagia and does not depend on metabolic alterations. Pair-feeding not only prevented the increased body weight, but also normalized the elevated levels of leptin and insulin and the alterations in arcuate nucleus neuropeptide Y (NPY) and proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene expression in OLETF rats (21). Pair-feeding also revealed what seems to be a primary deficit in dorsomedial hypothalamic (DMH) NPY mRNA expression in OLETF rats. DMH NPY mRNA expression was significantly elevated in pair-fed, normal weight OLETF rats, and this elevation was also found in 5-wk-old preobese OLETF rats (21). We have suggested that this dysregulation of DMH NPY gene expression may, in combination with the peripheral satiety deficit, contribute to the hyperphagia and obesity in OLETF rats (21).
CCK-AR knockout mice demonstrate a different phenotype from that of OLETF rats. In contrast to the OLETF rat, CCK-AR knockout mice have normal total daily food intake and maintain normal body weight well into adult life (22). Although these mice were insensitive to the feeding inhibitory action of peripheral exogenous CCK, this deficit did not appear to affect their overall food intake. These data were interpreted to suggest that CCK was not essential for controlling overall food intake nor was it involved in the long-term maintenance of body weight (22).
To investigate the basis underlying the different phenotypes in rats and mice lacking CCK-AR, we have characterized meal patterns in CCK-AR to / to  mice and determined whether CCK-AR to / to  mice demonstrated alterations in DMH NPY gene expression. The findings from these studies led us to compare the distribution of CCK-AR in mouse and rat brains and to determine the relationship between NPY and CCK-AR in rat DMH neurons. The data demonstrate that the distribution of CCK-AR differs in mice and rats, and this may account for the difference in phenotype between rats and mice lacking CCK-AR.
   Materials and Methods Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Meal patterns in CCK-AR knockout mice CCK-AR to / to  mice were generated as previously described (22). Both CCK-AR+/+ and CCK-AR to / to  mice were individually housed in home cages maintained on a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle (lights on at 0600 h). All procedures were approved by the institutional animal care and use committee at Johns Hopkins University or the Tufts-New England Medical Center animal research committee. At the beginning of experiments, adult CCK-AR+/+ and CCK-AR to / to  mice were transferred into test cages with a wire grid floor to prevent pellet hoarding. The test cages contained feeding devices (Coulbourn Instruments, Allentown, PA), which delivered 20-mg chow pellets. The pellet dispensers were controlled by infrared pellet-sensing photo beams (Med Associates, Inc., Georgia, VT). Individual pellets were delivered in response to removal of the previous pellet. Animals had ad libitum access to pellets and water. Animals were adapted to the testing apparatus and feeding paradigm for 10 d before experimental data collection. By this point, pellet spillage had decreased to less than 10/d. Data were recorded 24 h/d on a computer. A meal was defined as the acquisition of at least five pellets, preceded and followed by at least 10 min of no feeding (23). Meal size was defined as the number of pellets delivered during a meal. Data for the dark cycle, light cycle, and total 24 h for the variables of total intake, meal size, and meal frequency were saved on a computer and analyzed with Tongue Twister software (version 1.42; Dr. T. A. Houpt, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL). Data for each mouse were an average of data generated from 3 continuous days.
In situ hybridization in mouse brain Five-week-old male CCK-AR+/+ and CCK-AR to / to  mice were decapitated, and brains were removed rapidly and frozen. Coronal sections (14  microm) were cut via a cryostat, mounted on SuperFrost Plus slides (Fisher Scientific, Fairlawn, NJ), and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. The full length of rat CCK-AR cDNA (24) was synthesized by RT-PCR, subcloned into pcDNA1 vector, and linearized by an appropriate restriction enzyme. The antisense or sense riboprobe of CCK-AR was labeled with [35S]UTP (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ) using in vitro transcription systems (Promega Corp., Madison, WI). As previously described (25), the 35S-labeled antisense riboprobe of NPY was transcribed from rat NPY precursor cDNA (26). Standard in situ hybridization was conducted. Brian sections over the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and DMH regions (0.58 to 2.06 mm caudal to bregma) (27) were selected for examining CCK-AR mRNA expression. As well, brain sections over the DMH region (1.70 to 2.06 mm caudal to bregma) (27) were selected for examining NPY mRNA expression. Sections were treated with acetic anhydride and incubated in the standard hybridization buffer containing 108 cpm/ml 35S-labeled probe overnight. The incubation temperature was set at 55 C for NPY and 58 C for CCK-AR probe. After the hybridization, the sections were washed three times with 2x standard saline citrate (SSC), treated with 20  microg/ml ribonuclease A (Sigma-Aldrich Corp., St. Louis, MO) at 37 C for 30 min, rinsed in 2x SSC twice at 55 C for NPY or 58 C for CCK-AR, and finally washed twice in 0.1x SSC at 55 C for NPY or 58 C for CCK-AR for 15 min each time. Slides were dehydrated in gradient ethanol, air-dried, and exposed on BMR-2 film (Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, NY) for 1 to 5 d. After autoradiography, slides were examined histologically by cresyl violet staining.
CCK binding assay in the wild-type mouse The autoradiographic CCK binding assay was conducted as previously described (28). Adult male wild-type littermates of the CCK-AR to / to  mice were killed by decapitation, and brains were removed and rapidly frozen in isopentane at  to 70 C. Coronal sections (20  microm) over the PVN (0.58 to 1.22 mm caudal to bregma) and DMH regions (1.46 to 2.06 mm caudal to bregma) were cut via a cryostat and mounted on cold gelatin-coated slides (27). To differentiate between CCK-AR and CCK-BR, we compared the ability of the CCK-AR antagonist devazepide and the CCK-BR agonist desulfated CCK-8 (dCCK) to displace the binding site of 125I-labeled CCK-8. If the binding was inhibited by devazepide, but not by dCCK, the binding was occurring to CCK-AR. In contrast, if the binding was inhibited by dCCK, but not by devazepide, the binding was occurring to CCK-BR. Thus, after preincubation in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.5% BSA for 20 min at 24 C, slides were incubated in the standard binding buffer containing 50 pM [125I]Bolton-Hunter-labeled CCK-8 (PerkinElmer, Boston, MA) for 2 h at 24 C, either alone or in the presence of 10 nM devazepide, 100 nM dCCK, or 100  microM sulfated CCK-8. After the incubation, slides were washed in ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.5% BSA six times for 10 min each time. Washed slides were completely air-dried and exposed on BMR-2 film (Eastman Kodak Co.) for 5 to 7 d.
Dual immunohistochemistry in the rat Coronal sections (14  microm) from the brains of LETO and OLETF rats (obtained from Otsuka Pharmaceuticals, Otsuka, Japan) were prepared as described above and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Dual immunohistochemistry was modified from the procedure previously described (29). Sections were incubated with the primary antibody mixtures containing 1:1000 mouse anti-NPY monoclonal antibody (a gift from Dr. Eric Grouzmann, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland) (30) and 1:2000 rabbit antirat CCK-AR antibody (the targeted amino acid sequence SHMSTSAPPP corresponding to the C-terminal of the rat CCK-AR, Accurate Chemical  and  Scientific Corp., Westbury, NY) at 4 C overnight. After three washes, secondary antibodies were added to the slides: goat antimouse conjugated to fluorescein (1 ng/ microl; Roche, Indianapolis, IN) for detecting NPY peptide, and biotin-labeled goat antirabbit IgG (1:250; NEN Life Science Products, Inc., Boston, MA) for detecting CCK-AR. CCK-AR signal was further amplified by a TSA (tyramide signal amplification) Biotin System (NEN Life Science Products, Inc.) and stained with streptavidin-Texas Red conjugate (1:500; NEN Life Science Products, Inc.) according to the manufacturer s protocol. Sections were examined on an LSM 410 confocal microscope (Zeiss, New York, NY) using the 488-nm laser to excite fluorescein and the 543-nm laser to excite Texas Red.
DMH cannulation and CCK-8 injection in the rat Fifteen male Long-Evans rats (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA), weighing 275 to 300 g were implanted with chronic indwelling DMH cannulas. Animals were individually housed in hanging wire mesh cages maintained on a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle with a feeding schedule in which regular chow food was removed from the cages 2 h before lights off and returned to the cages just before dark onset. Water was always available. At the time of surgery, the rats were anesthetized with an im mixture of ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (20 mg/kg) and placed in a stereotaxic device. A 26-gauge, stainless steel guide cannula (Plastic One, Wallingford, CT) was implanted into the DMH with the following coordinates: 3.3 mm caudal to bregma, 0.3 mm lateral to midline, and 8.1 mm ventral to skull surface (15, 31). These coordinates were chosen based on results with pilot experiments. A 33-gauge stainless steel obturator was inserted into the cannula to maintain patency. After surgery, rats were given penicillin (60,000 U, im) to prevent postoperative infection and banamine (1 mg/kg, im) for pain relief.
After 7 d of postoperative recovery, 15 cannulated rats were randomly divided into two groups. Just before lights off, one group of eight animals was injected with 0.3  microl artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF; 147 mM Na+, 2.7 mM K+, 1.2 mM Ca2+, 0.85 mM Mg2+, and 153.8 mM Cl to ), and the other group of seven animals was injected with 500 pmol CCK-8 (Bachem, Torrance, CA) in 0.3  microl aCSF. All DMH injections were made with a Gilmont s micrometer syringe attached to polyethylene tubing and a 33-gauge stainless-steel injector (Plastic One). The tip of the injector extended 1.0 mm past the tip of the guide cannula. Injections were made over 10 s, and the injection remained in place for an additional 20 s before removal. Chow food was returned immediately after the injection. Food intakes were measured at 30 min, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, and 22 h after returning food to the cages. After a 7-d period of recovery, all rats were given second DMH injections with aCSF or CCK-8 (500 pmol) treatment, i.e. the rat that had previously received CCK-8 administration was given an aCSF injection at this time and vice versa. Food intake was measured as described for the first injections. Thus, each rat received aCSF and CCK-8 administration and served as its own control for comparison of the CCK-8 feeding effect.
After feeding tests, 15 of these animals and 10 additional DMH-cannulated rats were body weight-matched and randomly divided into two groups, aCSF control (n = 12) and CCK-8 treatment (n = 13), for assessing whether CCK-8 injection into the DMH affected hypothalamic NPY mRNA expression. Animals were maintained on the same feeding schedule as described above, in which regular chow was removed from the cages 2 h before lights off and was returned to the cages just before dark onset, with access to water ad libitum. Again, rats received either aCSF or CCK-8 injections as described above, but without access to chow food after injections. Two hours after injections, rats were killed with an overdose of sodium pentobarbital, and brains were removed rapidly and frozen for subsequent analyses of hypothalamic NPY gene expression (25, 32, 33).
As described above, a series of 14- microm coronal brain sections ranging from 2.6 to 3.6 mm caudal to bregma were cut (31) and mounted on slides as a series of six (section 1, slide 1; section 2, slide 2; etc.; section 7, slide 1, etc.) and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. The site of the DMH injection in rats was anatomically examined via cresyl violet staining after the process of brain sections. Data from rats with incorrect cannula placements were excluded from subsequent statistical analyses.
The in situ hybridization determination of hypothalamic NPY mRNA expression was conducted as described above. Quantitative analysis of the in situ hybridization data was performed with NIH Scion Image software (NIH, Bethesda, MD). Autoradiographic images were first scanned using an EPSON Professional Scanner (EPSON, Long Beach, CA) and saved via computer for subsequent analyses with Scion image software using autoradiographic 14C microscales (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) as a standard. Data for each animal were the mean of the product of hybridization area x density (background density was subtracted) obtained from four sections reflecting the level of gene expression in the region 3.2 to 3.4 mm posterior to bregma (for example, one section in 3.2 mm, one in 3.284 mm, one in 3.368, and one in 3.452 mm posterior to bregma) (31). Data from each group were normalized to aCSF-treated controls as 100%, and all data are presented as the mean  plus or minus  SEM.
For statistical analysis, data were analyzed by t test for two groups of comparison. P  <  0.05 was taken to be a statistically significant difference.
   Results Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Altered meal patterns in CCK-AR to / to  mice As shown in Table 1, CCK-AR to / to  mice had slightly, but not significantly, increased total daily food intake compared with wild-type control mice. However, both the diurnal pattern of intake and the meal patterns were altered in CCK-AR to / to  mice. Although both CCK-AR to / to  and CCK-AR+/+ mice consumed the majority of their food intake in the dark period (83.1% of total intake in knockout and 75.8% in wild-type mice, respectively), CCK-AR to / to  mice had significantly elevated food intake during the dark period (P  <  0.05) and tended to decrease their food intake during the light period (P  >  0.05) compared with wild-type mice. Meal pattern analysis revealed that CCK-AR to / to  mice had a significant increase in overall average meal size compared with wild-type mice (Table 1). CCK-AR to / to  mice consumed 35.3% more food per meal than wild-type mice. This alteration in meal patterns mainly occurred during the dark period, when the majority of food was consumed. Meal sizes were not elevated during the light period. Although meal frequency did not differ significantly between the two groups, CCK-AR to / to  mice appeared to have slightly decreased meal numbers in the total daily and light periods compared with wild-type mice. Thus, similar to OLETF rats, the absence of CCK-AR in mice resulted in a dysregulation of the control of meal size. However, in contrast to OLETF rats, CCK-AR to / to  mice were able to maintain their normal daily food intake. Whether this difference is due to the smaller magnitude of the meal size increase in CCK-AR to / to  mice than that in OLETF rats (35% vs. 80%) (20) or has another explanation was addressed in the next series of experiments.
View this table:    TABLE 1. Meal parameters in CCK-AR+/+ and CCK-AR to / to  mice
  No NPY mRNA expression was detected in the DMH in the mouse Our prior work demonstrated that DMH NPY mRNA expression is elevated in both adult pair-fed and young preobese OLETF rats (21). In this study we determined whether mice lacking CCK-A receptors displayed a similar alteration in DMH NPY. As shown in Fig. 1, NPY mRNA expression was only evident in the arcuate nucleus in both CCK-AR to / to  and CCK-AR+/+ mice. DMH NPY mRNA expression was not detectable in either CCK-AR to / to  or CCK-AR+/+ mice at 5 wk of age (Fig. 1), when OLETF rats had elevated DMH NPY gene expression.
View larger version (66K):    FIG. 1. In situ hybridization of NPY mRNA with a [35S]UTP-labeled NPY riboprobe in CCK-AR+/+ and CCK-AR to / to  mice. Within the hypothalamus, NPY mRNA expression was evident in the arcuate nucleus, but not in the DMH, in both CCK-AR+/+ (A) and CCK-AR to / to  (B) mice at 5 wk of age.
  CCK-AR was absent in the DMH in the mouse The absence of DMH NPY mRNA expression in CCK-AR to / to  mice raises the possibility that DMH NPY may be differentially controlled in rats and mice. Both CCK binding and in situ hybridization studies have demonstrated the presence of CCK-AR in rat DMH (28, 34, 35). To determine whether there were differences in the distribution of CCK-AR in rat and mouse brains, we determined the distribution of CCK-AR in mouse hypothalamus using 125I-labeled CCK-8 binding autoradiography and in situ hybridization histochemistry with a 35S-labeled CCK-AR riboprobe. Autoradiographs of the CCK binding assay in mouse brain revealed that within the hypothalamus, CCK-AR-binding sites were only present in the PVN (Fig. 2, A to C), CCK-BR binding sites were found in the ventromedial hypothalamus (Fig. 2, E to G), but no CCK binding activity was detected in the DMH (Fig. 2, E to G). Consistent with these binding data, in situ hybridization histochemistry revealed that CCK-AR mRNA was highly expressed in the PVN (Fig. 3A), but was not expressed in the DMH in mice (Fig. 3B). There was some evidence of CCK-AR mRNA expression in the arcuate nucleus (Fig. 3B), although there was no CCK binding activity detected there (Fig. 2, E to G). Thus, neither CCK binding assay nor CCK-AR mRNA expression determination detected the presence of CCK-AR in the DMH of the mouse.
View larger version (111K):    FIG. 2. Autoradiographs of 50 pM [125I]Bolton-Hunter-labeled CCK-8 binding in wild-type mouse brain (A to D, 0.94 mm posterior to bregma; E to H, 1.94 mm posterior to bregma) (27 ) with four conditions: alone (A and E) or with 10 nM devazepide (B and F), 100 nM dCCK (C and G), or 100  microM sulfated CCK-8 (sCCK; D and H). Within the hypothalamus, 10 nM devazepide blocked [125I]CCK-8 binding in the PVN (B), 100 nM dCCK blocked [125I]CCK-8 binding in the ventromedial nucleus (VMH), and no [125I]CCK-8 binding was found in the DMH.
  View larger version (103K):    FIG. 3. In situ hybridization of CCK-AR mRNA with a [35S]UTP-labeled CCK-AR antisense riboprobe in wild-type mouse brain. Within the hypothalamus, CCK-AR mRNA was expressed in the PVN (A) and slightly in the arcuate nucleus (B), but not in the DMH (B). No hybridization signal was detected after incubation with a sense probe (C). Scale bar, 350  microm.
  Colocalization of NPY and CCK-AR in DMH neurons in rats Our previous data demonstrated that NPY mRNA expression is elevated in the DMH, specifically in the compact subregion, in young preobese and adult pair-fed OLETF rats lacking CCK-AR (21), and the presence of CCK-AR in the rat DMH suggests that DMH NPY gene expression may normally be regulated by brain CCK through an interaction with CCK-AR. To investigate whether NPY and CCK-AR are colocalized in DMH neurons, we performed double immunostaining with anti-NPY and anti-CCK-AR antibodies in the rat brain. As showed in Fig. 4, both LETO and OLETF DMH contained NPY immunostaining neurons (Fig. 4, A and D, green). CCK-AR immunostaining neurons were only detected in the DMH in LETO controls (Fig. 4B, red). The absence of CCK-AR immunoreactivity in OLETF rats (Fig. 4E), is consistent with the absence of CCK-AR in this model. Confocal microscopic analysis revealed that NPY and CCK-AR were colocalized in DMH neurons (Fig. 4, C and G, orange). As shown in high magnification in Fig. 4G, CCK-AR staining was found on the surface of NPY neurons.
View larger version (90K):    FIG. 4. Dual immunohistochemistry of LETO control and OLETF rat brains with anti-NPY and anti-CCK-AR antibodies. In both LETO and OLETF rats, NPY immunostaining was evident in DMH neurons (green; A and D). CCK-AR immunostaining neurons were only detected in the DMH in LETO controls (red; B), not in OLETF rats (E). NPY and CCK-AR were colocalized in DMH neurons in LETO control rats (orange; C and G) by confocal microscopic analysis. Scale bar, 20  microm.
  Brain CCK acts on DMH NPY neurons to inhibit food intake The finding of NPY and CCK-AR colocalization in DMH neurons and the overexpression of DMH NPY in rats lacking CCK-AR suggest that brain CCK may normally play a role in controlling NPY gene expression in these DMH NPY neurons. To test this hypothesis and understand the basis of brain CCK actions in food intake, we assessed whether the injection of CCK into the DMH affected hypothalamic NPY gene expression. As shown in Fig. 5, NPY mRNA expression was significantly down-regulated by the parenchymal injection of CCK into the DMH. Exogenous CCK administration resulted in a 27% reduction of NPY mRNA expression in the ipsilateral compact subregion of the DMH (Fig. 5). We also found that, relative to controls, arcuate NPY mRNA expression was significantly reduced by 24% in CCK-injected rats (Fig. 5). These data confirm that CCK within the DMH is capable of directly regulating NPY gene expression.
View larger version (68K):    FIG. 5. Effects of CCK injection into the DMH on NPY mRNA expression. DMH CCK injection decreased NPY gene expression in the DMH (B and C) and the arcuate nucleus (B and C) in the rat compared with aCSF-treated controls. Values are the mean  plus or minus  SEM (n = 6 to 7). *, P  <  0.05 compared with the aCSF-treated group. Scale bar, 1 mm.
  As well as altering NPY mRNA expression, we found that exogenous injection of CCK into the DMH resulted in a reduction in 30-min food intake. Intake dropped from 2.37  plus or minus  0.21 g in vehicle controls (n = 9) to 1.57  plus or minus  0.31 g in the CCK-treated group (n = 10; P  <  0.05).
   Discussion Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Together, these data provide a more complete understanding of the consequences of CCK-AR deficiency in mice. We previously demonstrated that OLETF rats lacking CCK-AR have a deficit in their ability to limit the size of spontaneous meals and a disruption in the regulation of NPY mRNA expression in the DMH. We have suggested that both of these alterations may contribute to the hyperphagia and obesity of OLETF rats (19). The current results demonstrate that CCK-AR to / to  mice also have altered meal patterns. However, in contrast to the OLETF rat, overall food intake is not affected in CCK-AR to / to  mice. Thus, although both rats and mice lacking CCK-AR demonstrate a deficit in peripheral CCK satiety actions leading to increased meal size, their overall control of food intake and energy balance appears to differ. Assessment of the distribution of CCK-AR in the mouse brain revealed no CCK-AR binding activity and no CCK-AR mRNA expression in the DMH in normal mice. Previous work has consistently shown that the rat DMH contains CCK-AR (28, 34, 35). Furthermore, in contrast to the findings of elevated NPY gene expression in the DMH in young preobese and adult pair-fed OLETF rats (21), NPY mRNA expression was not detected in the DMH in either CCK-AR to / to  or CCK-AR+/+ mice. Moreover, CCK-AR to / to  mice have normal levels of NPY mRNA expression in the arcuate nucleus, where NPY mRNA expression is reduced in ad libitum-fed OLETF rats and is normalized by pair-feeding (21). Finally, a potential role for altered DMH NPY expression in hyperphagia and obesity in OLETF rats is suggested by the demonstrations that NPY and CCK-AR are colocalized in DMH neurons in intact rats and that CCK plays a role in controlling DMH NPY gene expression. Together, these results suggest that the differential distribution of brain CCK-AR determines different phenotypes expressed in rats and mice lacking CCK-AR.
The actions of peripheral CCK in the control of meal size are well characterized. Peripheral CCK produces dose-related suppression of meal size and results in the earlier appearance of a behavioral satiety sequence (11). These actions of the exogenous peptide appear to mimic a physiological role of endogenous CCK, because administration of CCK antagonists results in an increase in food intake. The feeding inhibitory actions of both exogenously administered and endogenously released CCK depend upon actions at the CCK-AR. CCK-mediated inhibition of food intake is blocked by CCK-AR antagonists, but is unaffected by CCK-BR antagonists (7). The current finding of increased meal size in CCK-AR to / to  mice demonstrates an action of endogenous CCK in the control of meal size in mice that is consistent with prior data on antagonists and our previous findings in the OLETF rat that also lacks CCK-AR (10, 11, 20). Thus, these data provide additional molecular biological support for a physiological role for endogenous CCK in the short-term control of food intake. The magnitude of the change in meal size in CCK-AR to / to  mice was quite a bit smaller than the 80% increase found in OLETF rats lacking CCK-AR. This difference may reflect a relative difference in the contribution of CCK to meal termination between rats and mice.
The current data demonstrate that CCK-AR to / to  mice have altered diurnal feeding patterns. In OLETF rats lacking CCK-AR, increased food intake was characterized by increased meal size in both the dark and light periods. In response to their increased meal size, meal number was decreased in the dark period, but this decrease was not compensatory (20). However, analyses of feeding patterns in CCK-AR to / to  mice revealed increased food intake in the dark period, characterized by an increase in meal size, and food intake tended to be decreased in the light period, characterized by a reduction in meal frequency, leading to the absence of significant changes in total food intake. These data suggest that CCK acting through CCK-AR plays a differential role in circadian activities between rats and mice.
Even though both rats and mice lacking CCK-AR have peripheral CCK satiety deficits, resulting in increased meal size, total daily food intake and body weight were normal in the CCK-AR to / to  mice, whereas OLETF rats lacking CCK-AR have been shown to be hyperphagic and to become obese. Although this may reflect a differential ability to compensate for smaller rather than larger increases in meal size, the present data also suggest that this difference in phenotype may be the outcome of a different distribution of brain CCK-AR between rats and mice. The potential importance of this differential distribution derives from the findings that in intact rats, NPY and CCK-AR are colocalized in DMH neurons, and CCK plays a role in modulating DMH NPY; exogenous administration of CCK into the DMH down-regulates DMH NPY mRNA expression. These results are consistent our previous findings demonstrating that NPY gene expression is up-regulated in the DMH in OLETF rats that lack CCK-AR (21). Although pair-feeding OLETF rats prevented their increased body weight and normalized their altered arcuate NPY and POMC gene expression, pair-feeding resulted in significantly elevated NPY gene expression in the DMH. This elevation of NPY mRNA expression in the DMH was also documented in young preobese OLETF rats (21). Therefore, CCK acting through CCK-ARs in the DMH appears to suppress DMH NPY gene expression in the rat. Such a suppression inhibits energy intake, in that DMH CCK injection reduces food intake. The hyperphagic and obese OLETF rat has a deficit in this CCK-NPY signaling pathway resulting from the lack of CCK-AR production. CCK acting through CCK-AR does not appear to play a role in controlling DMH NPY in the mouse.
We failed to detect any NPY mRNA expression in the DMH in either CCK-AR to / to  or CCK-AR+/+ mice by in situ hybridization determination. DMH NPY mRNA expression in ad libitum-fed rats is normally low and is only elevated in a few experimental situations, such as lactation (36) or in response to chronic food restriction (25). In the rat there are clear differences in the controls of DMH and arcuate nucleus NPY-expressing neurons. In the arcuate nucleus, NPY-containing neurons express Ob-RB, the long form of leptin receptors, and NPY expression is under leptin control (37). Elevated leptin levels reduce NPY mRNA expression, whereas food deprivation increases arcuate NPY gene expression. In contrast, DMH NPY-containing neurons do not express leptin receptors, and DMH NPY mRNA expression does not increase in response to acute food deprivation (25). Moreover, within the DMH, the region of altered NPY expression in response to a variety of treatments appears to differ. The current data demonstrating that the reduction of DMH NPY expression by CCK is localized to the compact subregion are consistent with our previous findings (21, 25). Whereas in lactating rats, Smith (36) had reported that although there was a very slight increase in NPY mRNA expression in the compact area, DMH NPY mRNA expression was mainly induced in the diffuse portion of the DMH. However, it is not yet clear whether NPY mRNA expression in different subregions of the DMH is differentially regulated. Controls of DMH NPY expression in the mouse have not been extensively investigated. Evidence that there are NPY-expressing neurons in the mouse comes from data demonstrating the induction of DMH NPY expression in several obesity models of disrupted melanocortin signaling: lethal agouti yellow (Ay), melanocortin 4 receptor knockout (MC4R to / to ) mice (38), and diet-induced obese mice (39). Such data suggest interactions between melanocortin signaling and metabolic status in the control of DMH NPY functions in the mouse.
The finding of decreased arcuate as well as DMH NPY mRNA expression in response to DMH CCK injection was surprising. Consistent with previous studies in the rat (28, 34), we failed to identify any CCK-AR binding activity in the arcuate nucleus of the mouse. This absence of arcuate CCK receptors implies a DMH/arcuate interaction in the controls of arcuate NPY. Although the main hypothalamic output of the DMH is thought to be the PVN, projections from the DMH to the arcuate nucleus have been identified (40). These projections may be the basis for the arcuate NPY reduction in response to DMH CCK injection.
A role for the DMH in feeding control has long been suggested. Bellinger and colleagues (41) demonstrated that small DMH electrolytic or excitotoxic lesions (DMHL) result in hypophagia, hypodipsia, reduced body weight, and reduced linear growth in the rat. Pair-feeding experiments, in which one group of sham-operated rats was pair-fed by a computerized feeding system that presented food pellets in the same amount and pattern as their "yoked" DMHL rats, demonstrated that the altered body weight in DMHL rats was primarily a result of altered food intake (42). Despite findings such as these, the particular contribution of the DMH and how it interacts with other hypothalamic nuclei involved in energy balance has not been well understood. Our findings in the rat suggest that the basis of the DMHL-induced hypophagia may be the elimination of an NPY-ergic output, an output normally under the control of CCK acting through CCK-AR. Although the distribution and mediation of CCK-AR in human brain are unclear, data from other primates have demonstrated that the DMH contains CCK-AR binding site in the monkey (43), and central injection of the CCK-AR, but not the B receptor, agonist inhibits food intake in the baboon (44). Such findings as these suggest that the DMH CCK-AR may play a role in food intake control in humans. A polymorphism of the CCK-AR gene in patients with obesity and diabetes has been reported in various studies (45, 46, 47, 48), providing support for such a role.
We have interpreted the current data to support the view that the different phenotypes of OLETF rats and CCK to / to  mice derive from a differential role for central CCK-AR in energy balance in rats and mice. OLETF rats are not a targeted deletion of CCK-AR, but arose a spontaneous mutation. It is quite possible that there are other genetic alterations in the OLETF rat that alone or in combination with the alterations in CCK-AR signaling account for the hyperphagia, obesity, or diabetes (49). However, such additional genetic defects are yet to be identified.
In summary, the present results suggest that although both rats and mice lacking CCK-AR demonstrate a deficit in meal size control, the differential distribution of CCK-AR in rat and mouse brains may determine the divergent effects of CCK-AR gene disruption. In the rat brain, CCK acting through CCK-AR appears to play a role in regulating DMH NPY gene expression. DMH CCK inhibits NPY mRNA expression and food intake. In the absence of CCK-AR, OLETF rats have a deficit in the control of DMH NPY gene expression, resulting in increased DMH NPY gene expression, increased food intake, and, eventually, obesity. In contrast, we found no evidence for the presence of CCK-AR in the DMH of the mouse. Thus, CCK-AR does not contribute to the control of DMH NPY gene expression, and in the absence of this central deficit, mice lacking CCK-AR are able to compensate for the absence of CCK satiety signaling and do not become hyperphagic and obese.
   Acknowledgments   The OLETF and LETO rats were generous gifts of Otsuka Pharmaceutical (Tokushima, Japan).
   Footnotes   This work was supported by National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Grants DK-57609 (to T.H.M.) and DK-046767 (to A.S.K.) and National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH067638 (to S.B.).
Abbreviations: aCSF, Artificial cerebrospinal fluid; CCK-A, cholecystokinin A; CCK-AR, cholecystokinin A receptor; dCCK, desulfated cholecystokinin-8; DMH, dorsomedial hypothalamic; DMHL, DMH electrolytic or excitotoxic lesion; LETO, Long-Evans Tokushima Otsuka; NPY, neuropeptide Y; OLETF, Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima fatty; POMC, proopiomelanocortin; PVN, paraventricular nucleus; SSC, standard saline citrate.
Received March 5, 2004.
Accepted for publication April 22, 2004.
   References Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Gibbs J, Young RC, Smith GP 1973 Cholecystokinin decreases food intake in rats. J Comp Physiol Psychol 84:488 to 495[Medline] Anika SM, Houpt TR, Houpt KA 1981 Cholecystokinin and satiety in pigs. Am J Physiol 240:R310 to R318 Gibbs J, Falasco JD, McHugh PR 1976 Cholecystokinin-decreased food intake in rhesus monkeys. Am J Physiol 230:15 to 18[Abstract/Free Full Text] Kissileff HR, Pi-Sunyer FX, Thornton J, Smith GP 1981 C-terminal octapeptide of cholecystokinin decreases food intake in man. Am J Clin Nutr 34:154 to 160[Abstract] West DB, Fey D, Woods SC 1984 Cholecystokinin persistently suppresses meal size but not food intake in free-feeding rats. Am J Physiol 246:R776 to R787 Shillabeer G, Davison JS 1984 The cholecystokinin antagonist, proglumide, increases food intake in the rat. Regul Pept 8:171 to 176[CrossRef][Medline] Moran TH, Ameglio PJ, Schwartz GJ, McHugh PR 1992 Blockade of type A, not type B, CCK receptors attenuates satiety actions of exogenous and endogenous CCK. Am J Physiol 262:R46 to R50 Reidelberger RD, O Rourke MF 1989 Potent cholecystokinin antagonist L 364718 stimulates food intake in rats. Am J Physiol 257:R1512 to R1518 Silver AJ, Flood JF, Song AM, Morley JE 1989 Evidence for a physiological role for CCK in the regulation of food intake in mice. Am J Physiol 256:R646 to R652 Moran TH, Ameglio PJ, Peyton HJ, Schwartz GJ, McHugh PR 1993 Blockade of type A, but not type B, CCK receptors postpones satiety in rhesus monkeys. Am J Physiol 265:R620 to R624 Smith GP, Gibbs J 1994 Satiating effect of cholecystokinin. Ann NY Acad Sci 713:236 to 241[Medline] Della-Fera MA, Baile CA 1979 Cholecystokinin octapeptide: continuous picomole injections into the cerebral ventricles of sheep suppress feeding. Science 206:471 to 473[Medline] Schick RR, Yaksh TL, Go VL 1986 Intracerebroventricular injections of cholecystokinin octapeptide suppress feeding in rats to pharmacological characterization of this action. Regul Pept 14:277 to 291[CrossRef][Medline] Crawley JN 1985 Clarification of the behavioral functions of peripheral and central cholecystokinin: two separate peptide pools. Peptides 6(Suppl 2):129 to 136 Blevins JE, Stanley BG, Reidelberger RD 2000 Brain regions where cholecystokinin suppresses feeding in rats. Brain Res 860:1 to 10[CrossRef][Medline] Blevins JE, Hamel FG, Fairbairn E, Stanley BG, Reidelberger RD 2000 Effects of paraventricular nucleus injection of CCK-8 on plasma CCK-8 levels in rats. Brain Res 860:11 to 20[CrossRef][Medline] Kawano K, Hirashima T, Mori S, Saitoh Y, Kurosumi M, Natori T 1992 Spontaneous long-term hyperglycemic rat with diabetic complications: Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima fatty (OLETF) strain. Diabetes 41:1422 to 1428[Abstract] Takiguchi S, Takata Y, Funakoshi A, Miyasaka K, Kataoka K, Fujimura Y, Goto T, Kono A 1997 Disrupted cholecystokinin type-A receptor (CCKAR) gene in OLETF rats. Gene 197:169 to 175[CrossRef][Medline] Bi S, Moran TH 2002 Actions of CCK in the controls of food intake and body weight: lessons from the CCK-A receptor deficient OLETF rat. Neuropeptides 36:1 to 11[CrossRef][Medline] Moran TH, Katz LF, Plata-Salaman CR, Schwartz GJ 1998 Disordered food intake and obesity in rats lacking cholecystokinin A receptors. Am J Physiol 274:R618 to R625 Bi S, Ladenheim EE, Schwartz GJ, Moran TH 2001 A role for NPY overexpression in the dorsomedial hypothalamus in hyperphagia and obesity of OLETF rats. Am J Physiol 281:R254 to R260 Kopin AS, Mathes WF, McBride EW, Nguyen M, Al-Haider W, Schmitz F, Bonner-Weir S, Kanarek R, Beinborn M 1999 The cholecystokinin-A receptor mediates inhibition of food intake yet is not essential for the maintenance of body weight. J Clin Invest 103:383 to 391[Abstract/Free Full Text] Castonguay TW, Kaiser LL, Stern JS 1986 Meal pattern analysis: artifacts, assumptions and implications. Brain Res Bull 17:439 to 443[CrossRef][Medline] Wank SA, Harkins R, Jensen RT, Shapira H, de Weerth A, Slattery T 1992 Purification, molecular cloning, and functional expression of the cholecystokinin receptor from rat pancreas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:3125 to 3129[Abstract] Bi S, Robinson BM, Moran TH 2003 Acute food deprivation and chronic food restriction differentially affect hypothalamic NPY mRNA expression. Am J Physiol 285:R1030 to R1036 Higuchi H, Yang HY, Sabol SL 1988 Rat neuropeptide Y precursor gene expression. mRNA structure, tissue distribution, and regulation by glucocorticoids, cyclic AMP, and phorbol ester. J Biol Chem 263:6288 to 6295[Abstract/Free Full Text] Franklin KBJ, Paxinos G 1997 The mouse brain in stereotaxic coordinates. San Diego: Academic Press Moran TH, Robinson PH, Goldrich MS, McHugh PR 1986 Two brain cholecystokinin receptors: implications for behavioral actions. Brain Res 362:175 to 179[CrossRef][Medline] Broberger C 1999 Hypothalamic cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) neurons: histochemical relationship to thyrotropin-releasing hormone, melanin-concentrating hormone, orexin/hypocretin and neuropeptide Y. Brain Res 848:101 to 113[CrossRef][Medline] Grouzmann E, Comoy E, Walker P, Burnier M, Bohuon C, Waeber B, Brunner H 1992 Production and characterization of four anti-neuropeptide Y monoclonal antibodies. Hybridoma 11:409 to 424[Medline] Paxinos G, Watson C 1986 The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates. 2nd ed. San Diego: Academic Press Sergeyev V, Broberger C, Gorbatyuk O, Hokfelt T 2000 Effect of 2-mercaptoacetate and 2-deoxy-D-glucose administration on the expression of NPY, AGRP, POMC, MCH and hypocretin/orexin in the rat hypothalamus. Neuroreport 11:117 to 121[Medline] Seoane LM, Lopez M, Tovar S, Casanueva FF, Senaris R, Dieguez C 2003 Agouti-related peptide, neuropeptide Y, and somatostatin-producing neurons are targets for ghrelin actions in the rat hypothalamus. Endocrinology 144:544 to 551[Abstract/Free Full Text] Woodruff GN, Hill DR, Boden P, Pinnock R, Singh L, Hughes J 1991 Functional role of brain CCK receptors. Neuropeptides 19(Suppl):45 to 56 Honda T, Wada E, Battey JF, Wank SA 1993 Differential gene expression of CCK-A and CCK-B receptors in the rat brain. Mol Cell Neurosci 4:143 to 154[CrossRef] Smith MS 1993 Lactation alters neuropeptide-Y and proopiomelanocortin gene expression in the arcuate nucleus of the rat. Endocrinology 133:1258 to 1265[Abstract] Schwartz MW, Woods SC, Porte Jr D, Seeley RJ, Baskin DG 2000 Central nervous system control of food intake. Nature 404:661 to 671[Medline] Kesterson RA, Huszar D, Lynch CA, Simerly RB, Cone RD 1997 Induction of neuropeptide Y gene expression in the dorsal medial hypothalamic nucleus in two models of the agouti obesity syndrome. Mol Endocrinol 11:630 to 637[Abstract/Free Full Text] Guan XM, Yu H, Trumbauer M, Frazier E, Van der Ploeg LH, Chen H 1998 Induction of neuropeptide Y expression in dorsomedial hypothalamus of diet-induced obese mice. Neuroreport 9:3415 to 3419[Medline] Thompson RH, Canteras NS, Swanson LW 1996 Organization of projections from the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus: a PHA-L study in the rat. J Comp Neurol 376:143 to 1733.3.CO;2-M 442[CrossRef][Medline] Bellinger LL, Castonguay TW, Bernardis LL 1994 Hormone and somatic changes in rats pair-fed to growth retarded dorsomedial hypothalamic nuclei-lesioned rats. Brain Res Bull 34:117 to 124[CrossRef][Medline] Hill DR, Woodruff GN 1990 Differentiation of central cholecystokinin receptor binding sites using the non-peptide antagonists MK-329 and L-365,260. Brain Res 526:276 to 283[CrossRef][Medline] Figlewicz DP, Nadzan AM, Sipols AJ, Green PK, Liddle RA, Porte Jr D, Woods SC 1992 Intraventricular CCK-8 reduces single meal size in the baboon by interaction with type-A CCK receptors. Am J Physiol 263:R863 to R867 Inoue H, Iannotti CA, Welling CM, Veile R, Donis-Keller H, Permutt MA 1997 Human cholecystokinin type A receptor gene: cytogenetic localization, physical mapping, and identification of two missense variants in patients with obesity and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). Genomics 42:331 to 335[CrossRef][Medline] Miller LJ, Holicky EL, Ulrich CD, Wieben ED 1995 Abnormal processing of the human cholecystokinin receptor gene in association with gallstones and obesity. Gastroenterology 109:1375 to 1380[Medline] Funakoshi A, Miyasaka K, Matsumoto H, Yamamori S, Takiguchi S, Kataoka K, Takata Y, Matsusue K, Kono A, Shimokata H 2000 Gene structure of human cholecystokinin (CCK) type-A receptor: body fat content is related to CCK type-A receptor gene promoter polymorphism. FEBS Lett 466:264 to 266[CrossRef][Medline] Marchal-Victorion S, Vionnet N, Escrieut C, Dematos F, Dina C, Dufresne M, Vaysse N, Pradayrol L, Froguel P, Fourmy D 2002 Genetic, pharmacological and functional analysis of cholecystokinin-1 and cholecystokinin-2 receptor polymorphism in type 2 diabetes and obese patients. Pharmacogenetics 12:23 to 30[CrossRef][Medline] Watanabe TK, Okuno S, Oga K, Mizoguchi-Miyakita A, Tsuji A, Yamasaki Y, Hishigaki H, Kanemoto N, Takagi T, Takahashi E, Irie Y, Nakamura Y, Tanigami A 1999 Genetic dissection of "OLETF," a rat model for non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: quantitative trait locus analysis of (OLETF x BN) x OLETF. Genomics 58:233 to 239[CrossRef][Medline]
