Dual Regulatory Effects of Orexins on Sympathetic Nerve Activity Innervating Brown Adipose Tissue in Rats Tohru Yasuda, Takayuki Masaki, Tetsuya Kakuma, Masahide Hara, Tomoko Nawata, Isao Katsuragi and Hironobu Yoshimatsu
Department of Internal Medicine I, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, Hasama, Oita 879-5593, Japan
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Professor Hironobu Yoshimatsu, M.D., Ph.D., Department of Internal Medicine I, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, 1 to 1 Idaigaoka, Hasama, Oita 879-5593, Japan. E-mail: hiroy{at}oita-med.ac.jp' + u + '@' + d + ''//-->.
   Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   This study examined how orexin regulates the activity of the sympathetic nerves that innervate brown adipose tissue (BAT) in rats. Infusion of orexin A at a dose of 0.3 nmol into the third cerebral ventricle decreased BAT sympathetic nerve activity, compared with the effect of PBS (P  <  0.05), whereas infusion of orexin B at the same dose caused a significant increase (P  <  0.05). Pretreatment with a third cerebral ventricle injection of 2.24  micromol/kg -fluoromethylhistidine, an irreversible inhibitor of the histamine-synthesizing enzyme histidine decarboxylase, attenuated the orexin B-induced response of BAT sympathetic nerve activity, but not that induced by orexin A. These results indicate that orexins may regulate both BAT energy expenditure and thermogenesis through their dual effects on sympathetic nerve activity. In particular, orexin B regulates BAT sympathetic nerve activity via neuronal histamine in the hypothalamus.
   Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   OREXIN A AND OREXIN B are hypothalamic neuropeptides that are derived from a 130-amino-acid precursor, prepro-orexin and are potent agonists at both the orexin-1 (OX1) and orexin-2 (OX2) receptors. Orexin neurons are located in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), from which they innervate almost all regions of the brain except the cerebellum (1, 2). Especially dense projections are observed in specific regions of the thalamus, limbic system, and aminergic nuclei, such as the noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC), serotonergic raphe nucleus, and histaminergic tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) (3, 4). Concomitantly, the presence of orexin receptors has been identified in these nuclei, namely OX1R in the LC and OX2R in the TMN (5). Hypothalamic histamine neurons, with cell bodies in the TMN, have been shown to be involved in the regulation of a variety of physiological functions, such as feeding behavior, drinking behavior, and thermoregulation, as well as the autonomic nervous and neuroendocrine systems (6). The orexin-histamine signaling pathway plays an important role in the regulation of the sleep-wakefulness cycle, although its involvement in other hypothalamic functions remains unclear (7).
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) plays a major role in energy expenditure and thermogenesis via the function of uncoupling protein 1. The regulation of energy expenditure in BAT is under the control of the sympathetic nervous system and higher brain structures. Discrete hypothalamic nuclei and various orexigenic or anorexigenic neuropeptides regulate BAT metabolism by affecting efferent sympathetic nerve activity (8, 9, 10, 11). Hypothalamic neuronal histamine, an anorexigenic substance, increases BAT sympathetic nerve activity (12). Orexins affect energy balance and thermoregulation. Orexin A has been shown to induce hypothermia and food intake, and both orexins increase renal sympathetic nerve activity (13, 14, 15, 16). Therefore, it is highly probable that orexins regulate BAT energy expenditure and thermogenesis by influencing sympathetic nerve activity. We thus hypothesized that hypothalamic neuronal histamine may mediate orexin signals to the sympathetic nerves that innervate BAT, because the close relationship between these two systems has been recognized both anatomically and functionally (17, 18). This study therefore examined the effects of central administration of orexins on electrophysiological sympathetic nerve activity in BAT and modulation of these responses by neuronal histamine.
   Materials and Methods Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Animals Mature male Sprague-Dawley rats (8 to 10 wk old) (Seac Yoshitomi, Fukuoka, Japan) were maintained on a 12-h light, 12-h dark photoperiod (lights on at 0700 h) in a room with controlled temperature (21  plus or minus  1 C) and humidity (55  plus or minus  5%). The rats were allowed free access to food (pelleted rodent chow no. CE-2; Clea Japan, Tokyo, Japan) and water. All studies were conducted in accordance with the Oita Medical University Guidelines, which are based on the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Reagents Orexin A, orexin B, and -fluoromethylhistidine (FMH) (all purchased from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) were each dissolved in PBS to final concentrations of 30  microM, 30  microM, and 67 mM, respectively. Each solution was freshly prepared on the day of use. The pH of each solution was adjusted to 6.4 to 7.2.
Cerebroventricular cannula implantation Each rat was fixed in a stereotaxic apparatus (Narishige, Tokyo, Japan) under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia (45 mg/kg, ip), and a stainless steel guide cannula (23 gauge) was surgically implanted into the third cerebral ventricle (i3vt). A stainless steel wire stylet (29 gauge) was left in place in the guide cannula to maintain patency and prevent leakage of cerebrospinal fluid. Surgery was carried out at least 1 wk before infusion of the test solutions; the details of the surgical procedure have been described elsewhere (19).
Measurement of sympathetic nerve activity Electrophysiological recordings were made under anesthesia (urethane, 0.8 g/kg; -chloralose, 80 mg/kg) using 20 cannulated rats. After dissection of the fine branches of the sympathetic nerves that innervate the interscapular BAT, the nerves were transected where they entered the BAT. Nerve activity was measured using a pair of silver-wire electrodes, which were immersed in a mixture of liquid paraffin and white petroleum jelly to prevent dehydration of the nerve tissue. The action potentials were amplified and filtered with low- and high-frequency cutoffs. The nerve signal was distinguished from background noise using a window discriminator. All nerve activity was analyzed based on values obtained after conversion of the raw data to standard pulses using an analog-to-digital converter. Impulses were integrated by a rate meter with a reset time of 5 sec and recorded using a chart recorder. Details of this nerve recording technique have been described elsewhere (8, 20). After determination of the background firing rate of the sympathetic nerves, changes in nerve activity were measured for up to 60 min after each bolus i3vt infusion with orexin A (0 to 3 nmol/rat, 1.0  microl/min, 10 min), orexin B (0 to 3 nmol/rat, 1.0  microl/min, 10 min), FMH (0 to 3  micromol/kg, 1.0  microl/min, 10 min), or PBS (n = 4 for each treatment). The doses of orexins and FMH were determined by previous studies (21, 22) and in our preliminary study. Infusions of orexins were performed 2 h after pretreatment with FMH at 1300 h. Nerve activity was measured at 10-min intervals, beginning 20 min before and continuing for 60 min after administration of the test solution. Nerve activity values recorded after the administration of each test solution were expressed as the percentage difference from the baseline value (at 0 min). The baseline 100% on figures signifies the 60-min averages score of BAT sympathetic nerve activity before the orexin treatment. For the analysis of dose dependence, orexins intracerebroventricular (icv) or PBS icv infusion was performed, and sympathetic nerve activity in BAT was recorded at 20 and 40 min after the infusion.
Statistical analysis Differences among the groups were assessed using two-way ANOVA and post hoc Fisher s protected least-significant difference test. A two-sided P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The statistical analysis of dose dependence was assessed by the Spearman s correlation coefficient by rank.
   Results Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Dose-dependent effects of orexins on BAT sympathetic nerve activity We observed the dose-dependent effects of orexin A and orexin B. The BAT sympathetic nerve activity changes were dependent on the doses of orexins when given icv (orexin A: 0 nmol, 100.0  plus or minus  4.5%; 0.03 nmol, 87.4  plus or minus  6.1%; 0.3 nmol, 63.2  plus or minus  6.4%; and 3 nmol, 47.4  plus or minus  6.9%; P  <  0.01) (orexin B: 0 nmol, 100.0  plus or minus  5.3%; 0.03 nmol, 135.2  plus or minus  7.3%; 0.3 nmol, 240.8  plus or minus  11.2%; and 3 nmol, 322.0  plus or minus  21.0%; P  <  0.01) (Table 1).
View this table:    TABLE 1. Dose-dependent effects of orexin A and orexin B on BAT sympathetic nerve activity
  The effect of i3vt infusion of orexin A on BAT sympathetic nerve activity Figure 1A shows the typical response of BAT sympathetic nerve activity after infusion of orexin A into the i3vt. Sympathetic nerve activity rapidly decreased after central administration of orexin A. The changes in sympathetic nerve activity in response to orexin A treatment differed significantly from those induced by PBS (P  <  0.05; Fig. 1B).
View larger version (20K):    FIG. 1. A, Rate meter plots of BAT sympathetic nerve activity after infusion of orexin A (0.3 nmol) into the i3vt. Vertical axis shows nerve impulses per 5 sec. Horizontal bars, 10-min time scale; bold horizontal bar, orexin A infusion. B, Percentage differences in sympathetic nerve activity from baseline (100%) after i3vt infusion of orexin A (0.3 nmol) or PBS (control group). The baseline 100% signifies the 60-min averages score of BAT sympathetic nerve activity before the orexin treatment. All data are means  plus or minus  SEM (n = 4 per group). , Orexin A-treated animals; , control. *, P  <  0.05; **, P  <  0.01 vs. control.
  The effect of pretreatment with FMH on changes in BAT sympathetic nerve activity induced by orexin A Figure 2A shows the typical responses of BAT sympathetic nerve activity to infusion of orexin A in rats pretreated with an infusion of FMH into the i3vt. The mean changes in sympathetic nerve activity induced by orexin A after pretreatment with FMH are shown in Fig. 2B. Sympathetic nerve activity decreased rapidly after central administration of orexin A in pretreated rats; these changes differed significantly from those induced by PBS (P  <  0.05) but did not differ significantly from those induced by orexin A in rats pretreated only with PBS (P  >  0.05).
View larger version (22K):    FIG. 2. A, Rate meter plots of BAT sympathetic nerve activity after i3vt injection of orexin A (0.3 nmol) 2 h after pretreatment with FMH (0.67  micromol). Vertical axis shows nerve impulses per 5 sec. Horizontal bars, 10-min time scale; bold bar, orexin A infusion. B, Percentage differences in sympathetic nerve activity from baseline after i3vt injection of orexin A (0.3 nmol), orexin A (0.3 nmol) with FMH (0.67  micromol) pretreatment, or PBS (control). The baseline 100% signifies the 60-min averages score of BAT sympathetic nerve activity before the orexin treatment. All data are means  plus or minus  SEM (n = 4 per group). , Orexin A-treated animals; , orexin A-treated animals with FMH pretreatment; , control. *, P  <  0.05;, **, P  <  0.01 vs. control.
  The effect of i3vt infusion of orexin B on BAT sympathetic nerve activity A typical response of BAT sympathetic nerve activity to i3vt infusion of orexin B is shown in Fig. 3A. Sympathetic nerve activity gradually increased after central administration of orexin B. The mean change in sympathetic nerve activity in response to orexin B treatment was statistically significant compared with that induced by PBS (P  <  0.05; Fig. 3B).
View larger version (17K):    FIG. 3. A, Rate meter plots of BAT sympathetic nerve activity after infusion of orexin B (0.3 nmol) into the i3vt. Vertical axis shows nerve impulses per 5 sec. Horizontal bars, 10-min time scale; bold horizontal bar, orexin B infusion. B, Percentage differences in sympathetic nerve activity from baseline after i3vt infusion of orexin B (0.3 nmol) or PBS. The baseline 100% signifies the 60-min averages score of BAT sympathetic nerve activity before the orexin treatment. All data are means  plus or minus  SEM (n = 4 per group). , Orexin B-treated animals; , control. *, P  <  0.05; **, P  <  0.01 vs. control.
  The effect of pretreatment with FMH on changes in BAT sympathetic nerve activity induced by orexin B Figure 4A shows the typical responses of BAT sympathetic nerve activity to infusion of orexin B in rats pretreated with an infusion of FMH into the i3vt. Sympathetic nerve activity gradually increased after central administration of orexin B in rats pretreated with FMH. The changes in sympathetic nerve activity in response to orexin B were significantly attenuated in pretreated rats compared with those induced by orexin B in rats pretreated with only PBS (P  <  0.05; Fig. 4B).
View larger version (20K):    FIG. 4. A, Rate meter plots of BAT sympathetic nerve activity after i3vt injection of orexin B (0.3 nmol) 2 h after pretreatment with FMH (0.67  micromol). Vertical axis shows nerve impulses per 5 sec. Horizontal bars, 10-min time scale; bold bar, orexin B infusion. B, Percentage differences in sympathetic nerve activity from baseline (100%) after i3vt injection of orexin B (0.3 nmol), orexin B (0.3 nmol) with FMH (0.67  micromol) pretreatment, or PBS (control). All data are means  plus or minus  SEM (n = 4 per group). , Orexin B-treated animals; , orexin B-treated animals with FMH pretreatment; , control. *, P  <  0.05; **, P  <  0.01 vs. control; +, P  <  0.05; ++, P  <  0.01 vs. FMH pretreatment.
     Discussion Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   This study demonstrated that i3vt infusion of orexin A or orexin B dose-dependently decreased or increased BAT sympathetic nerve activity in anesthetized rats, respectively. Depletion of neuronal histamine by pretreatment with FMH attenuated the sympathetic nerve responses induced by orexin B but not those induced by orexin A, indicating that the action of orexin B is mediated by neuronal histamine. Thus, it is likely that the dual effects of orexin on BAT sympathetic nerve may depend on differences in peptide subtype and/or its target neuronal substance. We present here a discussion of how orexin differentiates its actions on sympathetic nerves, as well as the effects on neuronal histamine.
The actions of orexins are mediated via two G protein-coupled receptors, OX1R and OX2R (1, 2). The receptor binding affinity of orexin A is 10 to 100 times greater than orexin B for OX1R, whereas both orexins are equipotent for OX2R (2, 23, 24, 25). Distinct expression patterns of the two receptor subtypes have been identified throughout the brain (5). Considering the i3vt infusion site used in this study, the target site for the binding of orexin to receptors may be either the hypothalamus or the brain stem. From this standpoint, the ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus, the A5 cell group, and the LC, all of which express high levels of OX1R mRNA, may be candidates as targets of orexin A, because these nuclei have been identified as central origins of efferent pathways to the BAT and to each other (26).
On the other hand, high-density expression of OX2R has been observed in the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the LHA, the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), the ventral premammillary nucleus, and the TMN, and moderate expression levels have been found in the medial preoptic area and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (5). The PVN and medial preoptic area were identified as major hypothalamic origins of efferent pathways to BAT in a neuroanatomical study (26). In fact, chemical stimulation of these nuclei increased BAT sympathetic nerve activity (8). From the ARC, the LHA (especially orexin neurons themselves), and the PVN, direct neuronal projections to the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, a location of sympathetic preganglionic neurons, have been identified (27, 28). Among these nuclei, cumulative evidence indicates the importance of the LHA and the ARC in orexin-A-OX2R signaling to suppress BAT sympathetic nerve activity. Electrophysiological studies have demonstrated an excitatory effect of orexin A on LHA neuronal activity and an inhibitory influence of this area on BAT sympathetic nerve activity (8), indicating that the LHA is a target site of orexin A for regulation of the sympathetic innervation of BAT.
In contrast to the suppressive effects of orexin A, central administration of orexin B in the present study increased BAT sympathetic nerve activity. In addition, this orexin B-induced response was attenuated by histamine depletion caused by pretreatment with FMH. As described above, the presence of orexin neurons, as well as the orexin receptor OXR2, has been identified in the TMN, a site of origin for histamine neurons (29). It has been demonstrated that neuronal histamine mediates orexin signaling in the regulation of the sleep-wakefulness cycle (30). Finally, central administration of histamine has been shown to increase BAT sympathetic nerve activity (12). Taken together, the evidence suggests that it is highly probable that orexin B regulates BAT sympathetic nerve activity in an excitatory manner through OX2R in the TMN. Our unpublished observation demonstrated that FMH treatment, but not neuropeptide Y antagonist, influenced orexin B-induced feeding and/or sympathetic nerve activity. The results suggested that neuronal histamine, but not neuropeptide Y, might be closely involved in the orexin B-induced feeding behavior and sympathetic nerve activity. Further study is necessary to clarify the details of this mechanism.
Considering both the present and previous studies, the results suggest that OXR in hypothalamus or the brain stem may mediate the orexin-induced effect on BAT sympathetic nerve activity. In addition, modulation of OXR in the outside of the hypothalamus, such as cerebral cortex, spinal cord, and the cisterna magna, is also possible. Previous studies demonstrated that orexin could have direct effects at the level of the sympathetic preganglionic neurons (31). Beyond BAT sympathetic nerve activity, further studies that examine the sympathetic nerve activity of renal and lumber nerves may be merited.
Functional studies have recently demonstrated that central administration of orexin A or orexin B induces hypothermia or hyperthermia, respectively (14, 15). These results are consistent with the present study, because the time course of BAT thermogenesis, as assessed by local BAT temperature, was similar to that observed for BAT sympathetic nerve activity (32). On the other hand, previous studies demonstrated an orexin A-induced hyperthermic response in unanesthetized animals (33, 34). It is well known that arousal state and muscle movement affect body temperature; in the unanesthetized condition, administration of orexin A induced an increase in arousal level and consequent arbitrary movements, both of which may elevate body temperature. There was the possibility that anesthesia might modulate BAT sympathetic nerve activity and thermogenesis because anesthesia is a factor, but not the sole mechanism, regulating arousal state and body temperature. Because the present study was limited to the acute phase of orexins  effects in anesthetized rats, it is possible that differences in the state of arousal may determine the effect of orexins on body temperature. In addition, the timing of infusion might influence the orexin-induced sympathetic nerve activity because the effects of orexins are clearly dependent on the sleep-wake cycle (30).
In summary, we demonstrated that central administration of orexins induces dual effects on BAT sympathetic nerve activity: inhibition by orexin A and stimulation by orexin B. Hypothalamic neuronal histamine is involved in the latter response of BAT sympathetic nerve activity.
   Footnotes   This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid 136770067 from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture and by Research Grants for Intractable Diseases from the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare, 2001 to 2002. This work was also supported in part by a grant from the Smoking Research Foundation, Venture Business Laboratory in Oita University and Grants 16922171 from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.
First Published Online March 3, 2005
Abbreviations: ARC, Arcuate nucleus; BAT, brown adipose tissue; FMH, -fluoromethylhistidine; i3vt, into the third cerebral ventricle; icv, intracerebroventricular; LC, locus coeruleus; LHA, lateral hypothalamic area; OX1, orexin-1; OX2, orexin-2; OX1R, OX1 receptor; OX2R, OX2 receptor; PVN, paraventricular nucleus; TMN, tuberomammillary nucleus.
Received September 15, 2004.
Accepted for publication February 16, 2005.
   References Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   de Lecea L, Kilduff TS, Peyron C, Gao X, Foye PE, Danielson PE, Fukuhara C, Battenberg EL, Gautvik VT, Bartlett 2nd FS, Frankel WN, van den Pol AN, Bloom FE, Gautvik KM, Sutcliffe JG 1998 The hypocretins: hypothalamus-specific peptides with neuroexcitatory activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:322 to 327[Abstract/Free Full Text] Sakurai T, Amemiya A, Ishii M, Matsuzaki I, Chemelli RM, Tanaka H, Williams SC, Richardson JA, Kozlowski GP, Wilson S, Arch JR, Buckingham RE, Haynes AC, Carr SA, Annan RS, McNulty DE, Liu WS, Terrett JA, Elshourbagy NA, Bergsma DJ, Yanagisawa M 1998 Orexins and orexin receptors: a family of hypothalamic neuropeptides and G protein-coupled receptors that regulate feeding behavior. Cell 92:573 to 585[CrossRef][Medline] Peyron C, Tighe DK, van den Pol AN, de Lecea L, Heller HC, Sutcliffe JG, Kilduff TS 1998 Neurons containing hypocretin (orexin) project to multiple neuronal systems. J Neurosci 18:9996 to 10015[Abstract/Free Full Text] Nambu T, Sakurai T, Mizukami K, Hosoya Y, Yanagisawa M, Goto K 1999 Distribution of orexin neurons in the adult rat brain. Brain Res 827:243 to 260[CrossRef][Medline] Marcus JN, Aschkenasi CJ, Lee CE, Chemelli RM, Saper CB, Yanagisawa M, Elmquist JK 2001 Differential expression of orexin receptors 1 and 2 in the rat brain. J Comp Neurol 435:6 to 25[CrossRef][Medline] Wada H, Inagaki N, Itowi N, Yamatodani A 1991 Histaminergic neuron system: morphological features and possible functions. Agents Actions Suppl 33:11 to 27[Medline] Huang ZL, Qu WM, Li WD, Mochizuki T, Eguchi N, Watanabe T, Urade Y, Hayaishi O 2001 Arousal effect of orexin A depends on activation of the histaminergic system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:9965 to 9970[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yoshimatsu H, Egawa M, Bray GA 1993 Sympathetic nerve activity after discrete hypothalamic injections of L-glutamate. Brain Res 601:121 to 128[CrossRef][Medline] Yoshimatsu H, Egawa M, Bray GA 1992 Effects of cholecystokinin on sympathetic activity to interscapular brown adipose tissue. Brain Res 597:298 to 303[CrossRef][Medline] Egawa M, Yoshimatsu H, Bray GA 1991 Neuropeptide Y suppresses sympathetic activity to interscapular brown adipose tissue in rats. Am J Physiol 260:R328 to R334 Egawa M, Yoshimatsu H, Bray GA 1990 Preoptic area injection of corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulates sympathetic activity. Am J Physiol 259:R799 to R806 Yasuda T, Masaki T, Sakata T, Yoshimatsu H 2004 Hypothalamic neuronal histamine regulates sympathetic nerve activity and expression of uncoupling protein 1 mRNA in brown adipose tissue in rats. Neuroscience 125:535 to 540[CrossRef][Medline] Date Y, Ueta Y, Yamashita H, Yamaguchi H, Matsukura S, Kangawa K, Sakurai T, Yanagisawa M, Nakazato M 1999 Orexins, orexigenic hypothalamic peptides, interact with autonomic, neuroendocrine and neuroregulatory systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:748 to 753[Abstract/Free Full Text] Szekely M, Petervari E, Balasko M, Hernadi I, Uzsoki B 2002 Effects of orexins on energy balance and thermoregulation. Regul Pept 104:47 to 53[CrossRef][Medline] Jaszberenyi M, Bujdoso E, Kiss E, Pataki I, Telegdy G 2002 The role of NPY in the mediation of orexin-induced hypothermia. Regul Pept 104:55 to 59[CrossRef][Medline] Shirasaka T, Nakazato M, Matsukura S, Takasaki M, Kannan H 1999 Sympathetic and cardiovascular actions of orexins in conscious rats. Am J Physiol 277:R1780 to R1785 Yamanaka A, Tsujino N, Funahashi H, Honda K, Guan JL, Wang QP, Tominaga M, Goto K, Shioda S, Sakurai T 2002 Orexins activate histaminergic neurons via the orexin 2 receptor. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 290:1237 to 1245[CrossRef][Medline] Ishizuka T, Yamamoto Y, Yamatodani A 2002 The effect of orexin-A and -B on the histamine release in the anterior hypothalamus in rats. Neurosci Lett 323:93 to 96[CrossRef][Medline] Sakata T, Tsutsui K, Fukushima M, Arase K, Kita H, Oomura Y, Ohki K, Nicolaidis S 1981 Feeding and hyperglycemia induced by 1,5-anhydroglucitol in the rat. Physiol Behav 27:401 to 405[CrossRef][Medline] Niijima A 1989 Nervous regulation of metabolism. Prog Neurobiol 33:135 to 147[CrossRef][Medline] Russell SH, Small CJ, Sunter D, Morgan I, Dakin CL, Cohen MA, Bloom SR 2002 Chronic intraparaventricular nuclear administration of orexin A in male rats does not alter thyroid axis or uncoupling protein-1 in brown adipose tissue. Regul Pept 104:61 to 68[CrossRef][Medline] Yoshimatsu H, Itateyama E, Kondou S, Hidaka S, Tajima D, Kurokawa M, Sakata T 1999 Hypothalamic neuronal histamine as a target of leptin action on feeding behavior in the central nervous system. Diabetes 48:1342 to 1346 Okumura T, Takeuchi S, Motomura W, Yamada H, Egashira Si S, Asahi S, Kanatani A, Ihara M, Kohgo Y 2001 Requirement of intact disulfide bonds in orexin-A-induced stimulation of gastric acid secretion that is mediated by OX1 receptor activation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 280:976 to 981[CrossRef][Medline] Holmqvist T, Akerman KE, Kukkonen JP 2002 Orexin signaling in recombinant neuron-like cells. FEBS Lett 526:11 to 14[CrossRef][Medline] Smart D 1999 Orexins: a new family of neuropeptides. Br J Anaesth 83:695 to 697[Free Full Text] Bamshad M, Song CK, Bartness TJ 1999 CNS origins of the sympathetic nervous system outflow to brown adipose tissue. Am J Physiol 276:R1569 to R1578 Elias CF, Lee C, Kelly J, Aschkenasi C, Ahima RS, Couceyro PR, Kuhar MJ, Saper CB, Elmquist JK 1998 Leptin activates hypothalamic CART neurons projecting to the spinal cord. Neuron 21:1375 to 1385[CrossRef][Medline] van den Pol AN 1999 Hypothalamic hypocretin (orexin): robust innervation of the spinal cord. J Neurosci 19:3171 to 3182[Abstract/Free Full Text] Inagaki N, Yamatodani A, Ando-Yamamoto M, Tohyama M, Watanabe T, Wada HJ 1988 Organization of histaminergic fibers in the rat brain. Comp Neurol 273:283 to 300[Medline] Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, Kadotani H, Rogers W, Lin X, Qiu X, de Jong PJ, Nishino S, Mignot E 1999 The sleep disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin (orexin) receptor 2 gene. Cell 98:365 to 376[CrossRef][Medline] van den Pol AN, Gao XB, Obrietan K, Kilduff TS, Belousov AB 1998 Presynaptic and postsynaptic actions and modulation of neuroendocrine neurons by a new hypothalamic peptide, hypocretin/orexin. J Neurosci 18:7962 to 7971[Abstract/Free Full Text] Yasuda T, Masaki T, Kakuma T, Yoshimatsu H 2003 Centrally administered ghrelin suppresses sympathetic nerve activity in brown adipose tissue of rats. Neurosci Lett 349:75 to 78[CrossRef][Medline] Yoshimichi G, Yoshimatsu H, Masaki T, Sakata T 2001 Orexin-A regulates body temperature in coordination with arousal status. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 226:468 to 476[Abstract/Free Full Text] Monda M, Viggiano A, De Luca V 2003 Paradoxical effect of orexin A: hypophagia induced by hyperthermia. Brain Res 961:220 to 228[CrossRef][Medline]
