Prepro-Orexin and Orexin Receptor mRNAs Are Differentially Expressed in Peripheral Tissues of Male and Female Rats Olaf Johren, Steffi J. Neidert, Marco Kummer, Andreas Dendorfer and Peter Dominiak
Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical University Lubeck, D-23538 Lubeck, Germany
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Olaf Johren, Ph.D., Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical University Lubeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-23538 Lubeck, Germany. E-mail: joehren{at}medinf.mu-luebeck.de
   Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Orexins are produced specifically by neurons located in the lateral hypothalamus. Recent results suggested peripheral actions of orexins. Therefore, we analyzed the mRNA expression of prepro-orexin and the orexin receptor subtypes OX1 and OX2 in peripheral rat tissues. Using real-time quantitative RT-PCR we detected significant amounts of prepro-orexin mRNA in testis, but not in ovaries. OX1 receptor mRNA was highly expressed in the brain and at lower levels in the pituitary gland. Only small amounts of OX1 receptor mRNA were found in other tissues such as kidney, adrenal, thyroid, testis, ovaries, and jejunum. Very high levels of OX2 receptor mRNA, 4-fold higher than in brain, were found in adrenal glands of male rats. Low amounts of OX2 receptor mRNA were present in lung and pituitary. In adrenal glands, OX2 receptor mRNA was localized in the zona glomerulosa and reticularis by in situ hybridization, indicating a role in adrenal steroid synthesis and/or release. OX1 receptor mRNA in the pituitary and OX2 receptor mRNA in the adrenal gland were much higher in male than in female rats. In the hypothalamus, OX1 receptor mRNA was slightly elevated in female rats. The differential mRNA expression of orexin receptor subtypes in peripheral organs indicates discrete peripheral effects of orexins and the existence of a peripheral orexin system. This is supported by the detection of orexin A in rat plasma. Moreover, the sexually dimorphic expression of OX1 and OX2 receptors in the hypothalamus, pituitary, and adrenal glands suggests gender-specific roles of orexins in the control of endocrine functions.
   Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   THE NEUROPEPTIDES OREXIN A and orexin B have been identified as endogenous ligands for an orphan seven-transmembrane receptor and were shown to stimulate food intake when injected into the brain ventricle (1). Orexin A and B derive from the same precursor, prepro-orexin, which is selectively expressed in the lateral hypothalamic area, a region involved in the control of feeding behavior. Prepro-orexin is identical with prepro-hypocretin, which was identified independently by directional tag PCR subtraction as an mRNA species specifically expressed in the rat hypothalamus (2, 3).
Orexin (hypocretin)-immunoreactive fibers project to various brain regions, such as the cerebral cortex, limbic system, locus coeruleus, and brainstem, and to the spinal chord (4, 5, 6, 7). The orexin receptor subtypes OX1 and OX2 are also widely expressed in the rat brain, and the expression patterns are in good agreement with the distribution of orexin-immunoreactive fibers (8). Based on the widespread projections of orexinergic neurons and functional considerations on the innervated brain areas, the involvement of orexins in the control of functions other than feeding behavior was proposed, including the control of neuroendocrine systems and the autonomic nervous system. Subsequently, orexins were shown to increase plasma ACTH and corticosterone levels and to reduce plasma PRL and GH levels when injected intracerebroventricularly (icv) (9, 10, 11). Furthermore, icv injected orexin increased or reduced plasma LH levels in female rats depending on the status of ovarian steroids (12, 13). In addition, icv or intracisternally injected orexin increased mean arterial blood pressure, heart rate, renal sympathetic nerve activity, and plasma catecholamine levels (14, 15, 16). Moreover, in dogs, mice, and humans the orexin system seems to be closely associated with the pathogenesis of narcolepsy (17, 18, 19).
To date, orexins were considered to be exclusively synthesized in the brain (20). However, recent results indicated endocrine effects after peripheral administration of orexins (21, 22, 23). On the other hand, iv injected orexin A is able to cross the blood-brain barrier (24), and the sites of peripheral orexin generation and the distribution of orexin receptor subtypes are not yet established. Therefore, we analyzed the expression of prepro-orexin as well as OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA in various tissues of adult male and female rats.
   Materials and Methods Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Animals and tissue preparation Wistar rats (250 to 300 g) were purchased from Charles River (Sulzfeld, Germany). A total of four male rats were anesthetized with pentobarbital (100 mg/kg, ip) and killed by decapitation. Brain, pituitary gland, thyroid, adrenals, lung, heart, kidneys, spleen, liver, stomach, pancreas, jejunum, duodenum, aorta, adipose tissue, muscle, and testis were removed immediately. Tissues were frozen quickly in isopentane (-30 C) and stored at -80 C until use. To analyze gender differences, brain, pituitary, and adrenals were prepared from eight male and eight female rats (250 to 300 g). The hypothalamus was dissected according to the method described by Palkovits and Brownstein (25). Trunk blood was collected into polypropylene tubes containing EDTA (15 mg) and aprotinin (0.7 mg) at 0 C and centrifuged at 1600 x g for 15 min at 0 C. Plasma was stored until use at -70 C.
For in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, tissues were obtained from an extra set of animals (n = 3), and sections (16  microm) were cut at -20 C in a cryostat. The sections were mounted on aminoalkylsilane-coated glass slides (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and stored at -80 C. Every 10th section was stained with hematoxylin/eosin.
RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis Tissue samples were homogenized in the presence of guanidinium isothiocyanate, and total RNA was isolated using silica gel-based spin columns (RNeasy Kit, QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). Genomic DNA was digested by thorough treatment with deoxyribonuclease I (QIAGEN). First strand cDNA was synthesized from 1  microg total RNA in a volume of 20  microl containing 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.0), 50 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 mM deoxy-NTPs, 1U/ microl RNasin, 0.5  microg oligo(deoxythymidine)15 primer, and 15 U AMV reverse transcriptase (Promega Corp., Mannheim, Germany). For no-template control samples, RNA was replaced by H2O. Possible contamination of RNA samples with genomic DNA was monitored by omission of the reverse transcriptase during the synthesis of the first strand cDNA. No genomic DNA was detected under these conditions.
PCR and cDNA cloning Prepro-orexin, OX1 and OX2 receptors, and ss-actin-specific sense and antisense oligonucleotide primers were designed based on the published cDNA sequences (1, 26) using the Primer3 software developed by S. Rozen and H. J. Skaletsky (code available at http://www-genome.wi.mit.edu/genome_software/other/primer3.html). Oligonucleotides were obtained from Live Technologies (Karlsruhe, Germany). The oligonucleotide sequence and product size for each primer pair used are shown in Table 1.
View this table:    Table 1. Nucleotide sequences of PCR primer
  PCR was performed with 5  microl first strand cDNA reaction in the presence of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.0), 50 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1.0 to 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM deoxy-NTPs, 0.5  microM sense and antisense primers, and 1.2 U DNA polymerase (DyNAzyme II, Biometra, Gottingen, Germany) in a final volume of 50  microl. The PCR conditions were: initial denaturation for 5 min at 94 C, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation for 30 sec at 94 C, annealing for 30 sec at 56 C, and extension for 60 sec at 72 C. After a final extension for 5 min at 72 C the amplification products were stored at -20 C. ss-Actin mRNA levels were analyzed as a positive control for cDNA synthesis after dilution of first strand cDNA (1:100). PCR products were size-fractionated by electrophoresis in 2.0% agarose gels in the presence of ethidium bromide.
The amplified prepro-orexin and OX1 and OX2 receptor cDNA fragments were subcloned into the pCR-II vector using a TA cloning kit (Invitrogen, Groningen, The Netherlands). The identity of the cloned cDNAs was confirmed by nucleotide sequencing (MWG Biotech, Ebersberg, Germany).
Real-time quantitative RT-PCR Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed on the GeneAmp 5700 sequence detection system (PE Applied Biosystems, Weiterstadt, Germany) using a SYBR green I reaction system (Eurogentec SA, Seraing, Belgium). Sense and antisense primers were identical to those described above (Table 1). Each sample was analyzed in triplicate along with standards and no-template controls. The reaction contained 100 ng cDNA, 0.3  microM primers, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM deoxy-NTPs, and 1.25 U Hot GoldStar DNA Polymerase (Eurogentec, Cologne, Germany) in a final volume of 50  microl. After denaturation at 95 C for 10 min, the cDNA products were amplified for 40 cycles, each cycle consisting of denaturation at 95 C for 15 sec, annealing at 56 C for 30 sec, and extension at 60 C for 30 sec. Product purity was confirmed by dissociation curve and agarose gel analysis.
Copy number calculations were based on the cycle threshold method (27). Serial dilutions of known amounts of the cloned prepro-orexin and OX1 and OX2 receptor cDNA fragments were used to generate standard curves. The threshold cycle number for each sample was calculated using the GeneAmp 5700 sequence detection system software with an automatic baseline setting and a fluorescence threshold (Rn) of 0.3. No-template control samples typically did not surpass the Rn of 0.3 at 40 cycles (Fig. 3, A and E). Only in the case of OX1 receptor mRNA amplification did no-template controls reach the Rn value of 0.3 at 35 about cycles (Fig. 3C). Therefore, copy numbers of mRNA were generally considered nonsignificant if the threshold cycle number exceeded 35 cycles. The value corresponds to a detection limit of about 20 mRNA copies/100 ng cDNA. For comparison of male and female rats, copy numbers of OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA were normalized to ss-actin mRNA levels.
View larger version (28K):    Figure 3. Real-time quantitative PCR demonstrating the presence of prepro-orexin (A and B), OX1 (C and D) and OX2 (E and F) receptor mRNA in rat brain and peripheral tissues. For no-template controls, mRNA was replaced by H2O (A, C, and D).
  In situ hybridization histochemistry Antisense oligonucleotides were obtained from Live Technologies. These probes were shown previously to hybridize specifically to OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA (8). To enhance the hybridization signal, three different antisense oligonucleotides directed against different parts of the receptor subtype mRNAs were used simultaneously for the detection of each receptor mRNA (8). The sequences of OX1 receptor antisense oligonucleotides were 5'-TCC TCA TAG TCT GGA GGC AGG TGG AAG GGT TCC CCA CTG CTA GTG-3', 5'-AAG GCT ATG AGA AAC ACG GCC ACG TAG GCC GCG ATG AGA ACC CAC-3', and 5'-TGC TGA GCT TCC AGT TGC TCT GAG GGT CGC TTC CAG TTC CGC ACC-3'. The sequences of OX2 receptor antisense oligonucleotides were 5'-AGT TGC GAC GAG GGA GGG AAT CCT CCA ATT TGG TGC TGG ACA TCA-3', 5'-AGA GCC ACG ACG AAC ACG ATG ATA TAC CCT GCG ATC AGG ACC CAC-3', and 5'-CAA AGT TGC TGA TCT GAG TAG TCA GGG ACT TCC TGC TCT CTG TAC-3'. Ten picomoles of each antisense oligonucleotide were 3'-end labeled to a specific activity of 104 Ci/mmol by incubation for 60 min at 37 C with 50 pmol [33P]deoxy-ATP (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Freiburg, Germany) and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). The labeled oligonucleotides were purified through Sephadex G-25 columns (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).
Sections were fixed for 10 min in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS (0.5 M NaCl and 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4) followed by two washes in PBS. The sections were then dehydrated in 70% (2 min) and 95% (2 min) ethanol and air-dried. Sections were then hybridized for 16 to 18 h at 42 C with 1 to 2 pmol/ml labeled oligonucleotides in hybridization buffer containing 50% formamide, 10% dextran sulfate, 1 x Denhardt s solution, 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 0.3 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM dithiothreitol, 0.2% SDS, 100  microg/ml salmon sperm DNA, and 250  microg/ml yeast tRNA. After hybridization, sections were washed several times in 1 x NaCl-sodium citrate (SSC) at room temperature, followed by high stringency washing in 1 x SSC at 55 C for 30 min. After washing in 1 x SSC and 0.1 x SSC for 1 min each at room temperature, sections were dehydrated through a series of ethanols containing 300 mM ammonium acetate, air-dried, and exposed to Hyperfilm 3H (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) for 1 to 2 wk. The specificity of the hybridization signal was assessed by hybridization of the 33P-labeled antisense oligonucleotides in the presence of a 100-fold molar excess of the respective unlabeled oligonucleotide.
Immunohistochemistry To distinguish the area of adrenal OX2 receptor expression obtained by in situ hybridization, we immunohistochemically stained the adrenal medulla adjacent sections using a monoclonal antibody against tyrosine hydroxylase (clone TH-2, Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany). This antibody was shown previously to specifically stain catecholaminergic neurons (28). After fixation of the sections in ice-cold acetone for 10 min, the sections were incubated with the primary antibody (1:2000 dilution) for 60 min at 37 degrees C in Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.6, containing 0.1% BSA. Positive staining was detected by the avidin-biotin complex method (29) with a biotinylated secondary antibody and peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin, using the LSAB kit (DAKO Corp., Hamburg, Germany) according to the manufacturer s protocol. The chromogen was 3,3-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (Sigma). As a negative control, sections were processed for immunostaining in the absence of the first antibody. In these control experiments no staining was observed.
RIA Orexin A was extracted from plasma samples by adsorption to phenyl-silica (Isolute SPE, International Sorbent Technology, Mid Glamorgan, UK). After elution in 60% acetonitrile and 1% trifluoroacetic acid, the samples were concentrated by lyophilization. The recovery of [125I]orexin A by this procedure was more than 90%. Orexin A concentrations were determined in the reconstituted samples by a specific RIA according to the instructions of the manufacturer (Peninsula Laboratories, Inc., Belmont, CA). The detection limit of the assay, based on the amount of orexin A that produced at least 10% tracer displacement, was 3 pg/tube. All samples were analyzed within the same assay for which an intraassay variability of 9% was calculated.
Statistical analysis Data are presented as the mean  plus or minus  SEM. Differences between male and female rats were evaluated by t test. P  <  0.05 was considered statistically significant.
   Results Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Expression of prepro-orexin and OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA in peripheral tissues by RT-PCR The mRNA expression for prepro-orexin and orexin receptor subtypes was analyzed in various peripheral tissues of adult male rats by RT-PCR (Fig. 1). Brain samples were used as positive controls, because mRNAs for prepro-orexin as well as those for the orexin receptor subtypes OX1 and OX2 are present in rat brain (1, 3, 8).
View larger version (78K):    Figure 1. Expression of prepro-orexin (B), OX1 (C), and OX2 receptor mRNA (D) in peripheral rat tissues. No amplification product was detected when reverse transcriptase was omitted during cDNA synthesis (A). ss-Actin-specific DNA fragments were detected in all samples analyzed (E).
  RT-PCR for prepro-orexin mRNA resulted in amplification of specific DNA fragments of 303 bp in rat brain and testis (Fig. 1B). In one case, we detected very low levels of prepro-orexin mRNA in heart. No prepro-orexin mRNA was detected in pituitary, adrenal, kidney, stomach, duodenum, jejunum, pancreas, liver, spleen, aorta, lung, thyroid, adipose tissue, and muscle of male rats (Fig. 1B), and no prepro-orexin was detected in ovaries (Fig. 2). Using real-time quantitative PCR we confirmed very high mRNA levels of prepro-orexin in the rat brain (300,000 copies/100 ng cDNA) and the presence of prepro-orexin mRNA in testes (Fig. 3, A and B). In ovary and heart, amplification above the threshold value of 0.3 occurred only at cycle numbers higher than 35 and was considered nonsignificant.
View larger version (36K):    Figure 2. Prepro-orexin mRNA is expressed in testis, but not in ovaries. cDNA samples obtained from ovaries and testis of four individual male and female rats were amplified using prepro-orexin-specific primer (A). The integrity of the RNA was verified by amplification of ss-actin-specific DNA fragments in all samples (B).
  OX1 receptor-specific DNA fragments (260 bp) were amplified from RNA of rat brain, pituitary, adrenal, thyroid, kidney, jejunum, testis, and ovaries (Fig. 1C). OX1 receptor mRNA levels were highest in the brain, followed by lower levels in the pituitary and very low levels in the kidney, thyroid gland, testes, ovaries, and adrenals (Fig. 3, C and D). OX2 receptor-specific DNA fragments (314 bp) were amplified from RNA of the rat brain, lung, adrenal, and pituitary (Fig. 1D). The highest amounts of OX2 receptor mRNA was found in the adrenal, which was 4 times higher than brain OX2 receptor mRNA levels (Fig. 3, E and F). In lung and pituitary, significant, but low, levels of OX2 receptor mRNA were present (Fig. 3F). No significant amounts of OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA were detected in stomach, duodenum, pancreas, liver, spleen, heart, aorta, adipose tissue, or muscle.
The specificity of the RT-PCR was verified by restriction analysis (Fig. 4). Restriction of the amplified prepro-orexin fragments with PvuII resulted in the expected cleavage into two discrete fragments (Fig. 4A) as predicted from the rat cDNA sequence (1). The specificity of OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA amplification was confirmed by restriction with AluI (Fig. 4, B and C). For a final proof of the RT-PCR specificity, the nucleotide sequences of subcloned amplification fragments of prepro-orexin and OX1 and OX2 receptor cDNA were determined by sequence analysis and were found to be identical to the corresponding prepro-orexin and OX1 and OX2 receptor cDNA sequences (1).
View larger version (68K):    Figure 4. Restriction analysis of the amplified RT-PCR DNA fragments. A, PvuII cuts the amplified prepro-orexin DNA fragments into two fragments: 136 and 167 bp. B, AluI cuts the amplified OX2 receptor DNA fragments into two fragments: 89 and 225 bp. C, AluI cuts the amplified OX1 receptor DNA fragments into four fragments: 20 (not visible), 51, 59, and 130 bp. For no-template controls, mRNA was replaced by H2O to monitor contamination (D).
  Amplification products for ss-actin (380 bp) were detected in all samples, showing the integrity of the RNA (Fig. 1E). No amplification product was detected when reverse transcriptase was omitted during cDNA synthesis (Fig. 1A). Moreover, control reactions without cDNA samples that were run in parallel in all PCR assays resulted in low background fluorescence (Fig. 3). Therefore, the presence of genomic DNA in our samples and DNA contaminations of the reactions from other sources can be excluded.
Localization of OX2 receptor mRNA in the adrenal gland by in situ hybridization To further explore the very high levels of OX2 receptor mRNA in the rat adrenal, we used radiolabeled antisense oligonucleotides to localize mRNA expression by in situ hybridization. As orexins have been shown to regulate tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA, the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine synthesis, in rat pheochromocytoma cells (30) we specifically immunostained the adrenal medulla using an antibody against tyrosine hydroxylase to distinguish between OX2 receptor mRNA expression in the medulla and that in the adjacent zona reticularis (Fig. 5B). However, no OX2 receptor mRNA was detected in the adrenal medulla (Fig. 5D), where tyrosine hydroxylase-like immunoreactivity is present in adjacent sections (Fig. 5B). Conversely, high levels of OX2 receptor mRNA were found in the zona glomerulosa and reticularis, but not in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex (Fig. 5D). The specificity of the hybridization signals was shown by the absence of hybridization signals in the presence of excessive unlabeled antisense oligonucleotides (Fig. 5, E and F). No significant levels of OX1 receptor mRNA were detected in the adrenal gland (Fig. 5C), although a strong signal was obtained in the locus coeruleus in simultaneously hybridized brain sections that served as positive controls (not shown). Possibly due to the low expression levels we could not detect OX1 or OX2 receptor mRNA by in situ hybridization with antisense oligonucleotide probes in other peripheral tissues, such as pituitary, kidney, and testes (not shown).
View larger version (140K):    Figure 5. Film autoradiographs showing the localization of OX2 receptor mRNA in male adrenal glands. Consecutive sections were stained with hematoxylin/eosin (A) or tyrosine hydroxylase antibodies (B) and hybridized with 33P-labeled OX1 (C) or OX2 receptor (D) antisense oligonucleotide probes. No signal was detected after hybridization with 33P-labeled OX1 (E) or OX2 receptor (F) antisense probes in the presence of an excessive amount of the respective unlabeled receptor probes. Scale bar in F, 1 mm (applies to all panels). ZG, Zona glomerulosa; ZF, zona fasciculata; ZR, zona reticularis; M, medulla.
  Comparison of OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA expression in male and female rats Because the peripheral expression of OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA was highest in pituitary and adrenal, respectively, we compared OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA levels in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis between male and female rats using real-time quantitative PCR. In the hypothalamus, OX1 receptor mRNA levels were slightly, but significantly, higher in female rats than in male rats (Fig. 6A). No differences between male and female rats were found in the amounts of hypothalamic OX2 receptor mRNA (Fig. 6A). In male rats, OX1 receptor mRNA levels in the pituitary (Fig. 6B) and OX2 receptor mRNA levels in the adrenal (Fig. 6C) were more than 5-fold higher compared with those in female rats. In situ hybridization with radiolabeled OX2 receptor antisense oligonucleotides confirmed the comparatively low OX2 receptor expression in the rat female adrenal gland (Fig. 7).
View larger version (16K):    Figure 6. Expression of OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA in the hypothalamus (A), pituitary (B), and adrenal (C) of male and female rats by real-time quantitative PCR. *, P  <  0.05; ***, P  <  0.001.
  View larger version (62K):    Figure 7. Film autoradiographs showing the expression of OX2 receptor mRNA in adrenal glands of male (A) and female rats (B) by in situ hybridization using 33P-labeled OX2 receptor antisense oligonucleotide probes. Scale bar, 1 mm. ZG, Zona glomerulosa; ZF, zona fasciculata; ZR, zona reticularis; M, medulla.
  Plasma orexin A levels Plasma orexin A levels were determined using a commercially available RIA kit and were 11.5  plus or minus  1.0 pg/ml in male rats and 13.6  plus or minus  1.1 pg/ml in female rats. There was no significant difference between male and female rats.
   Discussion Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Our present data demonstrate for the first time the expression of OX1 receptor mRNA in the thyroid, jejunum, gonads, and kidney and that of OX2 receptors in the lung. In addition, we confirmed recent results showing the presence of OX1 and OX2 receptor mRNA in pituitary and adrenal (31, 32) of rats. Using real-time quantitative PCR, we found the highest peripheral OX1 receptor mRNA expression in pituitary and the highest OX2 receptor mRNA expression in adrenal (4-fold higher than in brain). Furthermore, we detected profound differences between male and female rats in these tissues.
The expression of OX1 and OX2 receptors in pituitary and adrenal indicates a possible role of orexins in the regulation of endocrine systems, in particular of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. The effects of icv injected orexins on plasma levels of ACTH and corticosterone have been shown previously (9, 10, 11). Our present results indicate that orexins may also regulate pituitary and adrenal hormones by direct action on these organs. The localization of OX2 receptor mRNA in the zona glomerulosa and reticularis of the adrenal cortex supports the finding by Malendowitz et al. (22) of increased plasma corticosterone levels after sc injection of orexins and enhanced corticosterone secretion from dispersed rat adrenocortical cells by orexins. Recent results also demonstrated the stimulatory effect of orexin on the release of cortisol from human adrenal glands (33). As we found high levels of OX2 receptor mRNA, but could not detect OX1 receptor mRNA in the rat adrenal gland by in situ hybridization and only very low OX1 receptor mRNA levels by the highly sensitive real-time PCR, the effects of orexins on corticosterone synthesis and release in rats might be mediated mainly via the OX2 receptor.
Orexins have been shown to decrease tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA levels and dopamine release from the PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cell line (30), and OX1 as well as OX2 receptor-like immunoreactivity has been found in the adrenal medulla of rats (31). In contrast, we could not detect orexin receptor mRNA in the adrenal medulla by in situ hybridization. However, there may be low levels of orexin receptor mRNA in the adrenal medulla, and beside the stimulation of corticosterone release orexins may influence adrenal catecholamine synthesis and release.
The described effects of orexins on plasma levels of pituitary hormones such as ACTH, GH, PRL, and LH occurred after the injection of orexins into the brain ventricles, and these effects are most likely mediated via the corresponding releasing hormones (9, 11, 12, 13). Plasma TSH levels decreased after iv injection of orexin (34). However, this effect may not be a direct effect on the pituitary, but appears to arise from inhibition of TRH secretion in the hypothalamus (34). Thus, the physiological roles of orexin receptors in tissues such as pituitary and thyroid as well as in lung and kidney remain unclear, and further series of experiments will be needed to address the local effects of orexins in these tissues.
Interestingly, we found much higher levels of OX1 receptor mRNA in the pituitary and of OX2 receptor mRNA in the adrenal of male compared with female rats. Conversely, hypothalamic OX1 receptor mRNA levels were higher in female rats. Hypothalamic orexin A content is higher in female rats (35), and the effect of orexins on LH release depends on estrogens (12, 13). Thus, sex steroids not only affect the content and actions of orexin, but also may differentially regulate the expression of orexin receptors.
We also show the expression of prepro-orexin mRNA in rat testis. Sakurai et al. indicated the existence of prepro-orexin in rat testis (1). Beside its occurrence in the rat brain, orexin A was found in tissue extracts of rat testis, but not other peripheral tissues (36). Other groups, however, had been unable to detect prepro-orexin (prepro-hypocretin) or orexin A in peripheral rat tissues, including testis (3, 35). These discrepancies may be explained by the different sensitivities of the assays used. Using highly sensitive RT-PCR we were able to detect prepro-orexin mRNA in rat testis. Interestingly, we did not find prepro-orexin mRNA in rat ovaries. Thus, in peripheral tissues orexins appear to be synthesized exclusively in testis. On the other hand, compared with those in brain, prepro-orexin levels in testis were low, and in situ hybridization experiments using oligonucleotide antisense probes failed to reveal significant amounts of prepro-orexin in testis (our unpublished observation). Thus, the functional relevance of testicular prepro-orexin synthesis remains to be clarified.
Prepro-orexin mRNA was not found in other peripheral tissues expressing orexin receptors. Therefore, it is unlikely that in these organs orexins act in an autocrine/paracrine manner. The presence of orexin A in human plasma (37) has been recently described, and we also detected comparable concentrations of orexin A in rat plasma. Thus, circulating orexin may activate orexin receptors in peripheral tissues. The source of plasma orexin remains unclear. As we did not find differences between male and female rats in plasma orexin A levels, it is uncertain whether plasma orexins originate from testis. On the other hand, orexin-containing neurons project to the median eminence and pituitary (32), and orexin may be released into the circulation from the pituitary. As orexin A is relatively slowly metabolized after iv injection (24), a low rate of secretion should be sufficient to contribute to substantial plasma concentrations of orexin. The lack of gender differences in plasma orexin levels and the comparatively low prepro-orexin mRNA expression in testis indicate a predominant role of hypothalamic orexin production. Another possibility to stimulate peripheral orexin receptors could be the action of peptides other than orexin. NPY, for example, has been shown to act at the cloned orexin receptor (38), and NPY is locally produced in the adrenal gland (39).
In summary, we have shown a sexually dimorphic expression of prepro-orexin and orexin receptor subtypes in various peripheral tissues and propose the existence of a peripheral orexin system. Such a system may be involved in the regulation of endocrine and physiological functions that remain to be determined. The localization of OX2 receptor mRNA in the rat adrenal cortex indicates a role in adrenal steroid synthesis and/or release. Our results represent the basis for further physiological studies addressing possible peripheral orexin effects.
   Acknowledgments   The authors thank Constanze V. Siggel and Gudrun Vierke for expert technical assistance.
   Footnotes   Abbreviations: icv, Intracerebroventricularly; Rn, fluorescence threshold.
Received December 20, 2000.
Accepted for publication April 3, 2001.
   References Top Abstract Introduction Materials and Methods Results Discussion References   Sakurai T, Amemiya A, Ishii M, et al. 1998 Orexins and orexin receptors: a family of hypothalamic neuropeptides and G protein-coupled receptors that regulate feeding behavior. Cell 92:573 to 585[Medline] Gautvik KM, de Lecea L, Gautvik VT, et al. 1996 Overview of the most prevalent hypothalamus-specific mRNAs, as identified by directional tag PCR subtraction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:8733 to 8738[Abstract/Free Full Text] de Lecea L, Kilduff TS, Peyron C, et al. 1998 The hypocretins: hypothalamus-specific peptides with neuroexcitatory activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:322 to 327[Abstract/Free Full Text] Peyron C, Tighe DK, van Den Pol AN, et al. 1998 Neurons containing hypocretin (orexin) project to multiple neuronal systems. J Neurosci 18:9996 to 10015[Abstract/Free Full Text] Date Y, Ueta Y, Yamashita H, et al. 1999 Orexins, orexigenic hypothalamic peptides, interact with autonomic, neuroendocrine and neuroregulatory systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:748 to 753[Abstract/Free Full Text] van Den Pol AN 1999 Hypothalamic hypocretin (orexin): robust innervation of the spinal cord. J Neurosci 19:3171 to 3182[Abstract/Free Full Text] Harrison TA, Chen CT, Dun NJ, Chang JK 1999 Hypothalamic orexin A-immunoreactive neurons project to the rat dorsal medulla. Neurosci Lett 273:17 to 20[CrossRef][Medline] Trivedi P, Yu H, MacNeil DJ, Van der Ploeg LH, Guan XM 1998 Distribution of orexin receptor mRNA in the rat brain. FEBS Lett 438:71 to 75[CrossRef][Medline] Hagan JJ, Leslie RA, Patel S, et al. 1999 Orexin A activates locus coeruleus cell firing and increases arousal in the rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:10911 to 10916[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ida T, Nakahara K, Murakami T, Hanada R, Nakazato M, Murakami N 2000 Possible involvement of orexin in the stress reaction in rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 270:318 to 323[CrossRef][Medline] Kuru M, Ueta Y, Serino R, Nakazato M, Yamamoto Y, Shibuya I, Yamashita H 2000 Centrally administered orexin/hypocretin activates HPA axis in rats. NeuroReport 11:1977 to 1980[Medline] Pu S, Jain MR, Kalra PS, Kalra SP 1998 Orexins, a novel family of hypothalamic neuropeptides, modulate pituitary luteinizing hormone secretion in an ovarian steroid-dependent manner. Regul Pept 78:133 to 136[CrossRef][Medline] Tamura T, Irahara M, Tezuka M, Kiyokawa M, Aono T 1999 Orexins, orexigenic hypothalamic neuropeptides, suppress the pulsatile secretion of luteinizing hormone in ovariectomized female rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 264:759 to 762[CrossRef][Medline] Samson WK, Gosnell B, Chang JK, Resch ZT, Murphy TC 1999 Cardiovascular regulatory actions of the hypocretins in brain. Brain Res 831:248 to 253[CrossRef][Medline] Shirasaka T, Nakazato M, Matsukura S, Takasaki M, Kannan H 1999 Sympathetic and cardiovascular actions of orexins in conscious rats. Am J Physiol 277:R1780 to R1785 Chen CT, Hwang LL, Chang JK, Dun NJ 2000 Pressor effects of orexins injected intracisternally and to rostral ventrolateral medulla of anesthetized rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 278:R692 to R697 Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, et al. 1999 The sleep disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin (orexin) receptor 2 gene. Cell 98:365 to 376[Medline] Chemelli RM, Willie JT, Sinton CM, et al. 1999 Narcolepsy in orexin knockout mice: molecular genetics of sleep regulation. Cell 98:437 to 451[Medline] Nishino S, Ripley B, Overeem S, Lammers GJ, Mignot E 2000 Hypocretin (orexin) deficiency in human narcolepsy. Lancet 355:39 to 40[CrossRef][Medline] Kilduff TS, Peyron C 2000 The hypocretin/orexin ligand-receptor system: implications for sleep and sleep disorders. Trends Neurosci 23:359 to 365[CrossRef][Medline] Kirchgessner AL, Liu M 1999 Orexin synthesis and response in the gut. Neuron 24:941 to 951[Medline] Malendowicz LK, Tortorella C, Nussdorfer GG 1999 Orexins stimulate corticosterone secretion of rat adrenocortical cells, through the activation of the adenylate cyclase-dependent signaling cascade. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 70:185 to 188[CrossRef][Medline] Nowak KW, Mackowiak P, Switonska MM, Fabis M, Malendowicz LK 2000 Acute orexin effects on insulin secretion in the rat: in vivo and in vitro studies. Life Sci 66:449 to 454[CrossRef][Medline] Kastin AJ, Akerstrom V 1999 Orexin A but not orexin B rapidly enters brain from blood by simple diffusion. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 289:219 to 223[Abstract/Free Full Text] Palkovits M, Brownstein MJ 1988 Maps and guide to microdissection of the rat brain. Elsevier, New York Nudel U, Zakut R, Shani M, Neuman S, Levy Z, Yaffe D 1983 The nucleotide sequence of the rat cytoplasmic beta-actin gene. Nucleic Acids Res 11:1759 to 1771[Abstract] Higuchi R, Fockler C, Dollinger G, Watson R 1993 Kinetic PCR analysis: real-time monitoring of DNA amplification reactions. BioTechnology 11:1026 to 1030[Medline] Johren O, Sanvitto GL, Egidy G, Saavedra JM 1997 Angiotensin II AT1A receptor mRNA expression is induced by estrogen-progesterone in dopaminergic neurons of the female rat arcuate nucleus. J Neurosci 17:8283 to 8292[Abstract/Free Full Text] Hsu SM, Raine L, Fanger H 1981 Use of avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (ABC) in immunoperoxidase techniques: a comparison between ABC and unlabeled antibody (PAP) procedures. J Histochem Cytochem 29:577 to 580[Abstract] Nanmoku T, Isobe K, Sakurai T, et al. 2000 Orexins suppress catecholamine synthesis and secretion in cultured PC12 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 274:310 to 315[CrossRef][Medline] Lopez M, Senaris R, Gallego R, et al. 1999 Orexin receptors are expressed in the adrenal medulla of the rat. Endocrinology 140:5991 to 5994[Abstract/Free Full Text] Date Y, Mondal MS, Matsukura S, et al. 2000 Distribution of orexin/hypocretin in the rat median eminence and pituitary. Mol Brain Res 76:1 to 6[Medline] Mazzocchi G, Malendowicz LK, Gottardo L, Aragona F, Nussdorfer GG 2001 Orexin A stimulates cortisol secretion from human adrenocortical cells through activation of the adenylate cyclase-dependent signaling cascade. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86:778 to 782[Abstract/Free Full Text] Mitsuma T, Hirooka Y, Mori Y, et al. 1999 Effects of orexin A on thyrotropin-releasing hormone and thyrotropin secretion in rats. Horm Metab Res 31:606 to 609[Medline] Taheri S, Mahmoodi M, Opacka-Juffry J, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR 1999 Distribution and quantification of immunoreactive orexin A in rat tissues. FEBS Lett 457:157 to 161[CrossRef][Medline] Mitsuma T, Hirooka Y, Kayama M, et al. 2000 Radioimmunoassay for orexin A. Life Sci 66:897 to 904[CrossRef][Medline] Arihara Z, Takahashi K, Murakami O, et al. 2001 Immunoreactive orexin-A in human plasma. Peptides 22:139 to 142[CrossRef][Medline] Kane JK, Tanaka H, Parker SL, Yanagisawa M, Li MD 2000 Sensitivity of orexin-A binding to phospholipase C inhibitors, neuropeptide Y, and secretin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 272:959 to 965[CrossRef][Medline] Ehrhart-Bornstein M, Hinson JP, Bornstein SR, Scherbaum WA, Vinson GP 1998 Intraadrenal interactions in the regulation of adrenocortical steroidogenesis. Endocr Rev 19:101 to 143[Abstract/Free Full Text]
