A more direct approach has also been adopted whereby common genetic polymorphisms previously showing associations with other neuropsychiatric conditions have been found to be associated with non-cognitive symptoms in late-onset Alzheimer's disease. For example, one study (Holmes et al, 1998) of people with late-onset Alzheimer's disease found an association between common polymorphic variations in the 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C serotonin receptor genes (102-T/C and Cys23Ser polymorphisms, respectively), previously implicated in schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder, with psychotic symptoms in Alzheimer's disease. Associations were found between the presence of the C102 allele and the presence of visual and auditory hallucinations and between the presence of the Ser23 allele and visual hallucinations. Another study (Sweet et al, 1998) has found evidence to suggest an association of psychosis and aggression in patients with Alzheimer's disease who carry common polymorphisms in the dopamine receptor genes DRD1 and DRD3. These studies need to be replicated but they suggest that common receptor polymorphisms may have a role in the genesis of psychotic or other non-cognitive symptoms that are not implicated as genetic risk factors for late-onset Alzheimer's disease..  A more direct approach has also been adopted whereby common genetic polymorphisms previously showing associations with other neuropsychiatric conditions have been found to be associated with non-cognitive symptoms in late-onset Alzheimer's disease. For example, one study (Holmes et al, 1998) of people with late-onset Alzheimer's disease found an association between common polymorphic variations in the 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C serotonin receptor genes (102-T/C and Cys23Ser polymorphisms, respectively), previously implicated in schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder, with psychotic symptoms in Alzheimer's disease. Associations were found between the presence of the C102 allele and the presence of visual and auditory hallucinations and between the presence of the Ser23 allele and visual hallucinations. Another study (Sweet et al, 1998) has found evidence to suggest an association of psychosis and aggression in patients with Alzheimer's disease who carry common polymorphisms in the dopamine receptor genes DRD1 and DRD3. These studies need to be replicated but they suggest that common receptor polymorphisms may have a role in the genesis of psychotic or other non-cognitive symptoms that are not implicated as genetic risk factors for late-onset Alzheimer's disease..  

