Maturity onset diabetes of the young, subtype 1 (MODY1), is associated with defective glucose-dependent insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells. MODY1 is caused by mutation in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4). To understand better the MODY1 phenotype, we tested whether HNF4 was able to modulate directly the insulin gene promoter. Transfection of cultured 293T cells with an HNF4 expression vector led to 10-fold activation of a cotransfected reporter plasmid containing the rat insulin I gene promoter. Computer analysis revealed a potential HNF4-binding site between nucleotides 57 and 69 of the promoter; mutation of this sequence led to reduced ability of HNF4 to activate the promoter. The ability of HNF4 to bind this sequence was confirmed using gel shift analysis. In transfected INS-1 beta cells, mutation of either the HNF1 site or the HNF4 site in the insulin gene promoter led to 50-75% reduction in reporter gene activity; expression of dominant negative HNF4 led to significant reduction in the activity of wild type and both mutated promoters. Thus, in addition to the previously described indirect action of HNF4 on insulin gene expression mediated through elevated HNF1 levels, HNF4 also activates the insulin gene directly, through a previously unrecognized cis element.     INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES.  Maturity onset diabetes of the young, subtype 1 (MODY1), is associated with defective glucose-dependent insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells. MODY1 is caused by mutation in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4). To understand better the MODY1 phenotype, we tested whether HNF4 was able to modulate directly the insulin gene promoter. Transfection of cultured 293T cells with an HNF4 expression vector led to 10-fold activation of a cotransfected reporter plasmid containing the rat insulin I gene promoter. Computer analysis revealed a potential HNF4-binding site between nucleotides 57 and 69 of the promoter; mutation of this sequence led to reduced ability of HNF4 to activate the promoter. The ability of HNF4 to bind this sequence was confirmed using gel shift analysis. In transfected INS-1 beta cells, mutation of either the HNF1 site or the HNF4 site in the insulin gene promoter led to 50-75% reduction in reporter gene activity; expression of dominant negative HNF4 led to significant reduction in the activity of wild type and both mutated promoters. Thus, in addition to the previously described indirect action of HNF4 on insulin gene expression mediated through elevated HNF1 levels, HNF4 also activates the insulin gene directly, through a previously unrecognized cis element.     INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES.  

