Presence of apolipoprotein E 4 allele predisposes to early onset of primary Sjogren's syndrome M. Pertovaara, T. Lehtimaki1, R. Rontu1, J. Antonen1, A. Pasternack1 and M. Hurme1
Tampere University Hospital and 1 University of Tampere Medical School and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
Correspondence to: M. Pertovaara, Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Rheumatology, Tampere University Hospital, P.O. Box 2000, FIN-33521 Tampere, Finland. E-mail: marja.pertovaara{at}pshp.fi
   Abstract Top Abstract Introduction Subjects and methods Results References   Background. Apolipoprotein E (apoE) polymorphism plays a central role in lipid metabolism, but has recently also been suggested to regulate inflammation, as judged by levels of serum C-reactive protein (CRP).
Objective. To establish whether polymorphism of the apoE genes affects susceptibility to primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS), degree of inflammation or age of onset of pSS.
Methods. ApoE genotype distribution and allelic frequencies were analysed using PCR and the TaqMan system in 63 Finnish Caucasian patients with pSS and in 64 healthy controls matched for sex, ethnic origin and area of residence. The clinical and immunological data on the pSS patients were analysed in relation to the apoE genotypes.
Results. There was no difference between pSS patients and controls in apoE genotype and allelic frequencies. The apoE 4 allele was significantly associated with early onset of pSS in the entire population and in female patients (Kaplan to Meier log rank test, P = 0.0407 and P = 0.0168, respectively). The average age ( plus or minus  S.D.) of onset of pSS in all apoE 4 allele carriers was 46  plus or minus  12 and in other genotypes it was 53  plus or minus  10 yr (P = 0.031, t-test). ApoE polymorphism was not associated with signs of inflammation evaluated by such markers as concentration of plasma CRP, plasma interleukin-6, plasma TNF-, immunoglobulin G and haemoglobin, or leucocyte count or ESR.
Conclusions. ApoE polymorphism does not affect susceptibility to pSS or levels of plasma inflammatory indices in patients with pSS. However, a clear association prevails between apoE 4 and early onset of pSS.
KEY WORDS: Apolipoprotein E, Gene polymorphism, Primary Sjogren's syndrome, Age at disease onset
   Introduction Top Abstract Introduction Subjects and methods Results References   Primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease characterized by symptoms of dry eyes and mouth, various extraglandular symptoms, hypergammaglobulinaemia and abundant autoantibody production. Plasma levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), a proinflammatory cytokine, are increased in patients with pSS [1].
Apolipoprotein E (apoE) gene polymorphism plays a significant role in lipid metabolism, but in addition has recently also been suggested to regulate inflammation, as measured by levels of C-reactive protein [2]. The gene for apoE is polymorphic, presenting with three common alleles (2, 3, 4) at a single gene locus on chromosome 19. These alleles form six genotypes: E2/2, E3/2, E4/2, E3/3, E4/3 and E4/4, of which E3/3 is the commonest and E4/3 the second commonest in most populations. The presence of the apoE 4 allele is associated with an increased risk of coronary heart disease and Alzheimer's disease [reviewed in 3].
Circulating testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) levels have recently been found to be associated with the apoE genotype and women carrying the apoE 4 allele thus to be more susceptible to the development of some diseases associated with the menopause [4]. Sjogren's syndrome presents characteristically in middle-aged women. We hypothesized that apoE could be a candidate gene for susceptibility to pSS and, further, that the genetic polymorphism of apoE could exert an effect on markers of inflammation in patients with pSS. Hence, the aims of the present study were to investigate in a well-characterized group of Finnish Caucasian patients with pSS the effect of the polymorphism of apoE gene on susceptibility to and severity of pSS, particularly on markers of inflammation and age of onset of pSS.
   Subjects and methods Top Abstract Introduction Subjects and methods Results References   Subjects All patients fulfilling three or more modified Californian criteria for pSS [5] (salivary flow determinations were not performed; histological findings were graded on the Chisholm to Mason [6] scale, grades 3 and 4 being regarded as diagnostic) were selected from the records of patients with sicca symptoms examined in the Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Rheumatology, at Tampere University Hospital, Finland, during the years 1977 to 1992 (n = 111). Those alive were invited by letter to attend for gene polymorphism determinations, and samples for genotyping were obtained after informed consent from 63 pSS patients (61 female, two male, mean age 60  plus or minus  12 yr, mean disease duration 9  plus or minus  4 yr). Sixty-one of them also fulfilled the revised American to European consensus group criteria for pSS [7].
Clinical methods A careful clinical examination together with an in-depth interview with the patients, covering previous diseases, duration of sicca symptoms and existence of recurrent salivary gland swellings, had recently been conducted with these patients [8]. Special emphasis was laid on possible extraglandular symptoms of pSS (dermatological, endocrine, gastrointestinal, lymphoproliferative, musculoskeletal, neurological, renal, respiratory and vascular symptoms).
Standard laboratory tests The standard laboratory tests included blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and plasma C-reactive protein (CRP). Anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B antibodies were determined by enzyme immunoassay. Serum concentrations of immunoglobulin G (IgG) were measured by laser nephelometry and serum ss2-microglobulin by radioimmunoassay (Pharmacia beta-2-micro RIA kit; Pharmacia Diagnostics, Uppsala, Sweden). Plasma IL-6 and TNF- concentrations were determined using commercially available ELISAs (Pelikine human IL-6 ELISA kit and Pelikine Compact human TNF-a ELISA kit; CLB, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). The optical density of individual wells was determined with a Multiscan Biochromatic 348 spectrophotometer (Thermo Labsystems, Helsinki, Finland). The detection limit of the IL-6 assay was 0.6 pg/ml and that of the TNF- assay 1.4 pg/ml.
Normal controls Sixty-four healthy Finnish Red Cross Transfusion Service blood donors matched for sex (62 female, two male), ethnic origin (Finnish Caucasian) and area of residence (Tampere, Finland) served as a control group for DNA studies of pSS patients. Mean age of the control subjects was 53  plus or minus  7 yr.
Apolipoprotein E genotyping Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes using a commercially available kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). For the APOE 112 genotyping, fluorogenic allele-specific TaqMan probes and primers were used as previously described [9]. APOE 158 genotypes were determined using allele-specific fluorogenic probes with a conjugated minor groove binder (MGB) group. The nucleotide sequences of the APOE 158 primers and probes used in the PCR were deduced from published sequences deposited in the GenBank database and were chosen and synthesized in conjunction with Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA, USA) using the Assay-by-Design tool. DNA samples were genotyped by means of the 5' nuclease assay for allelic discrimination using the ABI Prism 7000 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) reaction containing genomic DNA, 1 x Universal PCR Master Mix, 900 nM of each primer and 200 nM of each probe was performed in 96-well plates using the standard protocol in a total volume of 25  microl. Water controls and known control samples previously typed by restriction fragment length polymorphism to PCR analysis were run in parallel with unknown DNA samples. After cycling, end-point fluorescence was measured and genotype calling carried out using the allelic discrimination analysis module.
Statistical analysis Unpaired Student's t-test and 2 test were used in comparisons of continuous and dichotomous variables, respectively. The association of the 4 allele with age at onset of pSS was analysed with the Kaplan to Meier log rank and t-tests. Findings were considered statistically significant at P < 0.05. Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 10.1 for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA).
Ethical approval The study protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of Tampere University Hospital.
   Results Top Abstract Introduction Subjects and methods Results References   ApoE genotypes and allelic frequencies and age of onset of pSS The apoE genotype and allele frequencies in pSS patients and control subjects did not differ (Table 1). However, pSS patients carrying the apoE 4 allele were significantly younger (mean  plus or minus  S.D.) (55  plus or minus  11 vs 62  plus or minus  11 yr, P = 0.028) than non-carriers. Moreover, the apoE 4 allele was associated with earlier onset of pSS in the entire population and in female patients (Kaplan to Meier log rank test, P = 0.0407 and 0.0168, respectively) (Fig. 1). The average age at disease onset in all apoE 4 allele carriers was 46  plus or minus  12 yr and in other genotypes it was 53  plus or minus  10 yr (P = 0.031, t-test and P = 0.039 for the patients fulfilling the American to European consensus group criteria, t-test). The mean age of female patients with pSS carrying the apoE 4 allele was 54  plus or minus  11 yr compared with 62  plus or minus  11 yr in non-carriers (P = 0.023), and their age at disease onset was 45  plus or minus  12 vs 53  plus or minus  10 yr (P = 0.019), respectively.
View this table:    TABLE 1. Apolipoprotein E (apoE) genotype and allelic frequencies in patients with primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) and in healthy subjects
  View larger version (12K):    FIG. 1. Kaplan to Meier plots showing the earlier age at onset in (a) both female and male patients with primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) carrying the 4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene (P = 0.0407, log rank test) and (b) female patients with pSS carrying the 4 allele of apolipoprotein E gene (P = 0.0168, log rank test).
  ApoE polymorphism and markers of inflammation The mean concentration of plasma CRP of the pSS patients was 5.8  plus or minus  3.2 mg/l, that of plasma IL-6 4.0  plus or minus  2.6 pg/ml and that of plasma TNF- 7.1  plus or minus  13.4 pg/ml. There were no statistically significant differences in such markers of inflammation as plasma CRP levels (6.5  plus or minus  4.2 vs 5.5  plus or minus  2.8 mg/l), plasma IL-6 (3.2  plus or minus  2.6 vs 4.1  plus or minus  2.6 pg/ml) and plasma TNF- concentrations (7.4  plus or minus  13.1 vs 7.0  plus or minus  14.0 pg/ml) between pSS patients carrying the apoE 4 allele and those not carrying this allele. Haemoglobin concentration (128  plus or minus  7 vs 128  plus or minus  13 g/l), leukocyte count (5.09  plus or minus  2.58 x 109/l vs 5.12  plus or minus  1.56 x 109/l), ESR (35  plus or minus  20 vs 30  plus or minus  20 mm/h), serum IgG (20.6  plus or minus  7.7 vs 18.0  plus or minus  6.8 g/l) and serum ss2-microglobulin concentrations (2.90  plus or minus  1.03 vs 2.90  plus or minus  1.06 mg/l) did not differ between these patient groups. Neither did anti-SSA (78  plus or minus  45 vs 64  plus or minus  55 IU/l) and anti-SSB antibody titres (56  plus or minus  70 vs 67  plus or minus  76 IU/l) differ between apoE 4 carriers and non-carriers.
ApoE polymorphism and clinical features of pSS No differences were observed in the frequencies of such extraglandular manifestations of pSS as a history of arthralgia, arthritis, salivary gland swelling, Raynaud's symptom, purpura, lymphadenopathy, pleuritis, alveolitis or pulmonary fibrosis, or peripheral or central nervous system symptoms in patients with or without apoE 4 allele. The number of diagnostic criteria for pSS did not differ between these patient groups (data not shown). The histological grade in labial salivary gland biopsies was lower in apoE 4 carriers than in non-carriers (grade 3 to 4 in 56 vs 80%, P = 0.048, respectively).
Discussion Genetic variation of the apoE gene influences susceptibility to coronary heart disease and sporadic Alzheimer's disease, apoE 4 being the allele with the strong association. Recently, genetic variation in the apoE gene was also found to affect the degree of inflammation by influencing serum CRP levels in dyslipidaemic middle-aged men [2]. Surprisingly, however, it was the patients carrying the apoE 4 allele, known to be associated with inflammation, who were found to have lower CRP levels than the others [2].
In patients with pSS, chronic inflammation is present, as shown by markedly elevated ESR levels, pronounced hypergammaglobulinaemia and elevated IL-6 levels. We therefore hypothesized that genetic polymorphism of the apoE could have an effect on markers of inflammation in patients with pSS. However, this proved not to be the case: first, no differences were found in the apoE genotype or allele frequencies between pSS patients and healthy controls. Moreover, the apoE 4 allele did not influence the levels of CRP in patients with pSS. This finding might be explained by the fact that pSS is known to belong to a group of autoimmune diseases with a modest or even absent CRP reaction [10]. However, in addition to lack of differences in CRP levels, no differences emerged in any other well-established markers of inflammatory activity, including plasma IL-6, TNF- and IgG between apoE 4 carriers and non-carriers. The apoE 4 carrier state was also not associated with clinical features of the disease. Labial salivary gland histology, a marker of severity of inflammation in pSS, was even milder in apoE 4 allele carriers compared with non-carriers.
We found that the age at disease onset was significantly lower in pSS patients with the apoE 4 allele than in those without this allele. Similarly, it has been noted that the effect of the apoE 4 allele on coronary atherosclerosis [11] and Alzheimer's disease [12] is age-dependent. Moreover, in recent studies, apoE polymorphism has also been found to affect the age at onset of infectious diseases [13, 14]. ApoE polymorphism was found to affect the age of becoming infected with Plasmodium falciparum in children from Ghana [13] and to have a possible role in protection against the early stages of malaria [14]. Viral infections, e.g. Epstein to Barr, cytomegalovirus or retrovirus infections have been proposed to act as triggering agents in the development of pSS in genetically susceptible subjects [15]. There are no data on apoE polymorphism and susceptibility to or age at disease onset related to these infections. We do not know the background to the significant association between apoE 4 and earlier disease onset of pSS. One might speculate, however, that this association could be mediated, for example, through a possible effect on the time-point of a triggering viral infection.
A further speculative explanation for the earlier age at onset of pSS, particularly in female subjects carrying the apoE 4 allele, might be a relation to hormonal factors, which in view of the strong female predominance among patients with pSS are also believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of pSS [15]. The gender bias and the concomitant characteristic late age of disease onset in pSS have been difficult to interpret, as oestrogens have been considered to favour autoimmunity and androgens to protect from it. Carriers of apoE 4 have been held to be more susceptible to the development of some diseases associated with menopause, as they have been found to have higher serum DHEA and testosterone levels than women not carrying this allele [4]. Furthermore, an interaction between oestrogen and apoE in the Alzheimer's disease process has been observed; in a recent study apoE polymorphism influenced binding to the oestrogen receptor and altered transcriptional activity in response to oestrogen [16].
We have demonstrated that apoE polymorphism does not affect susceptibility to pSS or plasma inflammatory indices in patients with pSS, but there is a clear association between apoE 4 allele and early onset of pSS.
   Acknowledgments   This study was supported by the Medical Research Fund of Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland and the Maud Kuistilas Foundation.
The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.
   References Top Abstract Introduction Subjects and methods Results References   Hulkkonen J, Pertovaara M, Antonen J, Pasternack A, Hurme M. Elevated interleukin-6 plasma levels are regulated by the promoter region polymorphism of IL-6 gene in primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) and correlate with clinical manifestations of the disease. Rheumatology 2001;40:656 to 61.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Manttari M, Manninen V, Palosuo T, Ehnholm C. Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and C-reactive protein in dyslipidemic middle-aged men. Atherosclerosis 2001;156:237 to 8.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Mahley RW, Rall SC Jr. Apolipoprotein E: far more than a lipid transport protein. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2000;1:507 to 37.[CrossRef][ISI][Medline] Zofkova I, Zajickova K, Hill M, Horinek A. Apolipoprotein E gene determines serum testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone levels in postmenopausal women. Eur J Endocrinol 2002;147:503 to 6. Erratum in: Eur J Endocrinol 2003;148:587.[ISI] Fox RI, Robinson CA, Curd JG, Kozin F, Howell F. Sjogren's syndrome. Proposed criteria for classification. Arthritis Rheum 1986;29:577 to 85.[ISI][Medline] Chishom DM, Mason DK. Labial salivary gland biopsy in Sjogren's disease. J Clin Pathol 1968;21:656 to 60.[ISI][Medline] Vitali C, Bombardieri S, Jonsson R et al. Classification criteria for Sjogren's syndrome: a revised version of the European criteria proposed by the American to European consensus group. Ann Rheum Dis 2002;61:554 to 9.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Pertovaara M, Korpela M, Kouri T, Pasternack A. The occurrence of renal involvement in primary Sjogren's syndrome: a study of 78 patients. Rheumatology 1999;38:1113 to 20.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Koch W, Ehrenhaft A, Griesser K et al. TaqMan systems for genotyping of disease-related polymorphisms present in the gene encoding apolipoprotein E. Clin Chem Lab Med 2002;40:1123 to 31.[Medline] Moutsopoulos HM, Elkon KB, Mavridis AK, Acritidis NC, Hughes GRV, Pepys MB. Serum c-reactive protein in primary Sjogren's syndrome. Clin Exp Rheumatol 1983;1:57 to 8.[ISI][Medline] Ilveskoski E, Perola M, Lehtimaki T et al. Age-dependent association of apolipoprotein E genotype with coronary and aortic atherosclerosis in middle-aged men. An autopsy study. Circulation 1999;100:608 to 13.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Poirier J, Davignon J, Bouthillier D, Kogan S, Bertrand B, Gauthier S. Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and Alzheimer's disease. Lancet 1993;8873:697 to 9. Wozniak MA, Faragher EB, Todd JA, Koram KA, Riley EM, Itzhaki RF. Does apolipoprotein E polymorphism influence susceptibility to malaria? J Med Genet 2003;40:348 to 51.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Aucan C, Walley AJ, Hill AVS. Common apolipoprotein E polymorphisms and risk of clinical malaria in the Gambia. J Med Genet 2004;41:21 to 4.[Free Full Text] Jonsson R, Gordon TP, Konttinen YT. Recent advances in understanding molecular mechanisms in the pathogenesis and antibody profile of Sjogren's syndrome. Curr Rheumatol Rep 2003;5:311 to 6.[Medline] Lambert JC, Coyle N, Lendon C. The allelic modulation of apolipoprotein E expression by estrogen: potential relevance for Alzheimer's disease. J Med Genet 2004;41:104 to 12.[Abstract/Free Full Text] Submitted 2 June 2004; revised version accepted 23 July 2004. This Article Abstract Full Text (PDF) All Versions of this Article: 43/12/1484    most recent keh383v1 Alert me when this article is cited Alert me if a correction is posted Services Email this article to a friend Similar articles in this journal Similar articles in PubMed Alert me to new issues of the journal Add to My Personal Archive Download to citation manager Disclaimer Request Permissions Google Scholar Articles by Pertovaara, M. Articles by Hurme, M. PubMed PubMed Citation Articles by Pertovaara, M. Articles by Hurme, M. Related Collections Other Rheumatology Online ISSN 1462-0332 - Print ISSN 1462-0324 Copyright   2006 British Society for Rheumatology Oxford Journals Oxford University Press Site Map Terms  and  Conditions --> Privacy Policy Frequently Asked Questions Other Oxford University Press sites: Oxford University Press American National Biography Booksellers' Information Service Children's Fiction and Poetry Children's Reference Corporate  and  Special Sales Dictionaries Dictionary of National Biography Digital Reference English Language Teaching Higher Education Textbooks Humanities International Education Unit Law Medicine Music Online Products Oxford English Dictionary Reference Rights and Permissions Science School Books Social Sciences Very Short Introductions World's Classics
