Effects of Different Experimental Conditions on the PrPSc Core Generated by Protease Digestion IMPLICATIONS FOR STRAIN TYPING AND MOLECULAR CLASSIFICATION OF CJD* Silvio Notari, Sabina Capellari, Armin Giese, Ingo Westner, Agostino Baruzzi, Bernardino Ghetti , Pierluigi Gambetti||, Hans A. Kretzschmar, and Piero Parchi**
From the Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Universita di Bologna, 40123 Bologna, Italy, Institut fuer Neuropathologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet, 81377 Muenchen, Germany,  Department of Pathology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5120, and ||Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106
Received for publication, December 4, 2003 , and in revised form, January 28, 2004.
   ABSTRACT TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   The discovery of molecular subtypes of the pathological prion protein PrPSc has provided the basis for a novel classification of human transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) and a potentially powerful method for strain typing. However, there is still a significant disparity regarding the understanding and nomenclature of PrPSc types. In addition, it is still unknown whether a specific PrPSc type is associated with each TSE phenotypic variant. In sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), five disease phenotypes are known, but only two major types of PrPSc, types 1 and 2, have been consistently reproduced. We further analyzed PrPSc properties in sCJD and variant CJD using a high resolution gel electrophoresis system and varying experimental conditions. We found that pH varies among CJD brain homogenates in standard buffers, thereby influencing the characteristics of protease-treated PrPSc. We also show that PrPSc type 1 and type 2 are heterogeneous species which can be further distinguished into five molecular subtypes that fit the current histopathological classification of sCJD variants. Our results shed light on previous disparities in PrPSc typing, provide a refined classification of human PrPSc types, and support the notion that the pathological TSE phenotype is related to PrPSc structure.
   INTRODUCTION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs),1 or prion diseases, are a phenotypically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders that affects humans and animals. Human diseases include Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease, kuru, and fatal insomnia (1-3). CJD, by far the most common human TSE, may occur as a sporadic disease of unknown etiology (sCJD), a disease associated with mutations in the prion protein gene (PRNP), or a proven exogenous infection. The latter group includes variant CJD (vCJD) a distinct disease phenotype that is believed to have been transmitted from cattle to humans through the consumption of contaminated meat (3).
The cellular prion protein (PrPc), a host-encoded, copper- and membrane-bound glycoprotein of unknown function, has a key role in TSE pathogenesis (4). There is no agent replication or transmission of infectivity in the absence of PrPc expression (5). Moreover, an abnormal, partially protease-resistant isoform (PrPSc) of PrPc specifically accumulates in the nervous system during infection and represents the hallmark of the disease (4, 6). The conversion of PrPc to PrPSc is a posttranslational event associated with an increase in -sheet secondary structure in the protein (7, 8).
CJD, like scrapie of sheep, comprises a broad spectrum of clinicopathological variants (9). In scrapie transmitted to mice, the most extensively studied TSE, the strain of the agent and the host genotype variability determined by polymorphisms in the coding region of PRNP are the major determinants of disease phenotype (10). Different prion strains transmit diseases to syngenic animals that differ in topography, type of lesion, and intracerebral distribution of PrPSc. In humans, disease susceptibility and phenotypic expression are influenced by PRNP mutations and by the polymorphism at codon 129 that encodes either methionine (M) or valine (V) (11-13). Distinct agent strains have been demonstrated (14-17) but remain to be characterized in full.
Although uncertainties remain on the molecular basis of TSE strains and the relationship between strains and PrP, several lines of evidence indicate that PrPSc exists in a variety of molecular subtypes showing differences in conformation, glycosylation, protease resistance, and aggregation state (15, 18-23), which may encode, at least in part, strain-specific properties. Furthermore, evidence from transmission studies indicates that the different PrPSc types showing distinct physicochemical properties represent genuine biochemical signatures of individual strain-host genotype interactions. Because the analysis of biochemical properties of PrPSc is much less time-consuming than bioassays in mice, unraveling the physicochemical properties of PrPSc associated with each TSE strain or phenotype (i.e. PrPSc "typing") has undoubtedly become of crucial importance for strain typing and molecular classification of TSEs, with wide implications for both disease diagnosis and epidemiologic surveillance.
Unfortunately, there is a significant disparity in the literature regarding the existence of distinct human PrPSc types (23-27), and this to some extent is also true for animal TSEs (28-30). Based on differences in gel mobility and N-terminal sequence of the core fragments generated by proteinase K (PK), Parchi et al. (23-25) originally identified two human PrPSc types (named type 1 and type 2). Type 1 has a relative molecular mass of 21 kDa and the primary cleavage site at residue 82, and type 2 has a relative molecular mass of 19 kDa and the primary cleavage at residue 97. In other studies, however, the PrPSc type 1 from codon 129 MM subjects was further distinguished into 2 subtypes showing a less than a 1-kDa difference in mobility (26, 27). According to Wadsworth et al. (26) the two PrPSc type 1 subtypes, they named types 1 and 2, show indistinguishable fragment sizes only when PK digestion is performed in the presence of 20 mM EDTA, thereby representing two distinct conformations acquired by PrPSc in the presence of metal ions such as copper and zinc. In contrast, the two putative PrPSc subtypes described by Zanusso et al. (27), also named types 1 and 2 although not comparable with those of Wadsworth et al. (26), would represent two distinct protein conformations because of a different response to pH variations (i.e. one conformation is pH-dependent; the other is not). The rationale for the study of the effect of metal ions and pH on PrPSc properties lies in the finding that the octapeptide repeat PrPc sequence between residues 51 and 91 is a Cu 2+ binding motif that changes its conformation in the presence of copper and that this copper binding stoichiometry is pH-dependent (31, 32).
In previous studies on PrPSc typing in sCJD, we also reported a certain degree of heterogeneity within both type 1 and type 2 samples, particularly among type 1 samples from codon 129 MM subjects (23, 24). However, these were subtle biochemical differences compared with the type 1/type 2 difference in relative molecular mass and failed to show a consistent reproducibility or a correlation with the disease pathological phenotype, suggesting that they might be related to the experimental conditions rather than to intrinsic differences in strains. For example, it is noteworthy that the various protocols that have been applied to define PrPSc properties to date included the use of PK well outside its optimal conditions (i.e. pH optimum above 7.5; optimum temperature above 37  degrees C) (33, 34) and, above all, were not standardized with respect to variables that might affect its activity. On the other hand, the characterization of at least five distinct pathological sCJD subtypes (9) argues for the existence of more than two prion strains and two PrPSc types. Thus, it is conceivable that the application of more sensitive techniques and more rigorous experimental conditions will lead to the distinction between potential artifacts related to sample preparation and disease-specific biochemical differences suitable for a refined classification of CJD PrPSc types. To reach this goal, shed light on the current PrPSc typing controversies, and further contribute to the understanding of the molecular basis of TSE strains and phenotypic variability, we examined the effect of different experimental conditions on the characteristics of PrPSc fragments associated with the sCJD subtypes and vCJD using a high resolution gel electrophoresis system. Particular emphasis has been given to the study of the interplay between the effects of homogenate pH and PK concentration/activity.
   EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Patients and Tissues We studied 75 sCJD cases and 4 vCJD cases phenotypically characterized in regard to clinical and histopathological features, pattern of PrP deposition, PRNP genotype, and Western blot profile of PrPSc. Sporadic CJD subtypes were classified according to Parchi et al. (9). They included 40 MM1, 5 MV1, 10 VV2, 10 MV2, 5 VV1, and 5 MM2-cortical. Brain tissues were obtained at autopsy and were kept frozen at -80  degrees C until use. Brain samples used were from the frontal cerebral cortex, usually the middle frontal gyrus. In 5 MM1 cases tissue was also obtained from the putamen, entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala.
Molecular Genetics Genomic DNA was extracted from blood or frozen brain tissue. Genotyping of the PRNP coding region was performed as described (9).
Sample Preparation and pH Measurement Brain homogenates (10%, w/v) were prepared on ice in the following conditions: 1) lysis buffer (LB) (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM Tris); 2) lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris); 3) PBS (Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline lacking MgCl2 and CaCl2 (0.2 g/liter KH2PO4, 8.0 g/liter NaCl, 1.15 g/liter Na2HPO4, 0.2 g/liter KCl); 4) PBS with a 10-fold increase in phosphate salt concentration (2.0 g/liter KH2PO4, 8.0 g/liter NaCl, 11.5 g/liter Na2HPO4); 5) PBS with a 10-fold increase in phosphate salt concentration (2.0 g/liter KH2PO4, 8.0 g/liter NaCl, 11.5 g/liter Na2HPO4) and the addition of a detergent (1% Sarkosyl or 1% Nonidet P-40); 6) citrate-phosphate buffer.
According to their pKa values, PBS buffers were prepared between pH 5.5 and 8.0, lysis buffers were prepared between at pH 6.7 and 8.0, and the citrate-phosphate buffer was prepared at pH 4.0, 5.0, and 5.5. Because the pH of Tris buffers changes significantly according to the buffer temperature, the lysis buffers were titrated to the desired pH value at 37  degrees C (i.e. the temperature at which protease digestion is performed). Because sodium deoxycholate is known to precipitate at acidic pH (around 6.3) it was not used at pH values lower than 6.5. Experiments exploring the influence of EDTA on PK digestion were performed using 250 mM EDTA stock solutions at pH 7.0 or 8.0.
Samples were treated at 37  degrees C with PK (20 units/mg, Roche Diagnostics), chymotrypsin (1500 units/mg from bovine pancreas; Calbiochem), or cathepsin L (6500 milliunits/mg, 1.1 mg/ml from bovine kidney; Calbiochem) using various concentration/incubation time combinations (concentration range for PK, 7-10,000  microg/ml; incubation time range for PK, 1-15 h). PK stock solutions (10 mg/ml or higher) were prepared in storage buffer (50% glycerol, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2.9 mg/ml CaCl2). Small aliquots were prepared and stored at -20  degrees C. For each experiment a new aliquot was used. Protease digestion was terminated by the addition of 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. The pH of tissue homogenates was measured in duplicate using a needle electrode (Hamilton).
Western Blot 10% brain homogenates were resuspended in sample buffer (final concentration: 3% SDS, 4% -mercaptoethanol, 10% glycerol, 2 mM EDTA, 62.5 mM Tris, pH 6.8) and boiled for 8 min before loading. Protein samples (brain tissue equivalent to 0.2-1 mg wet tissue) were separated in 12 or 15% SDS-polyacrylamide gels (37.5:1 acrylamide:bisacrylamide) using gel electrophoresis apparatus holding running gels of different lengths (5.5 or 15 cm) (Bio-Rad). Proteins were transferred to Immobilon P (Millipore) for 2 h at 60V, blocked with 10% nonfat milk in Tween Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.5, and probed with the appropriate antibody. The monoclonal 3F4 (1:50,000), which binds PrP between residues 108 and 111 (35), was used as primary antibody. The immunoreactivity was visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Biosciences) on Kodak BioMax Light films (Eastman Kodak Co.).
   RESULTS TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Analysis of PrPSc Type 1 in sCJD MM Subjects The Effect of Gel Resolution To examine the gel mobility of human PrPSc type 1 in more detail than in previous studies we compared the Western blot profiles obtained in 12% Tris-glycine PAGE gels 5.5 cm long (gels commonly used for PrPSc-typing analysis) with those obtained using longer gels (15 cm). In the latter condition, PrPSc extracted from sCJD MM1 showed a more significant heterogeneity. This related either to the number of bands or to the electrophoretic mobility of the most represented bands (Fig. 1, a and b).
View larger version (48K):    FIG. 1. Electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 1 (MM subjects) generated by PK digestion in standard lysis buffer at pH 7.4 (a and b) and pH 8 (c and d). Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from 9 MM1 (lanes 1-9) and 1 VV2 (lane 10) subjects is shown. Homogenates were prepared in standard LB, pH 7.4 (a and b) or 8.0 (c and d). Aliquots were digested with 100  microg/ml PK for 1 h at 37  degrees C. The actual pH values for each homogenate are shown at the bottom of each lane. a and c, samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 12% mini-gel (5.5 cm long). b and d, samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 12% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons.
  The Effect of pH When we compared MM1 samples prepared in LB pH 7.4 with those homogenized in LB pH 8.0 we noticed a higher heterogeneity in gel migration in the first condition (Fig. 1). This observation prompted us to measure the pH of the homogenates. Samples prepared using standard PBS or lysis buffer at pH 7.4 (i.e. buffers that have been used to date for PrPSc-typing studies) showed unexpected heterogeneous pH values ranging from 6.48 to 7.46 (Table I). Similar pH variations were also detected in homogenates prepared from different areas of the same brain (Fig. 2). Homogenates prepared in water were obviously even more acidic (Table I). Interestingly, there was a significant correlation between the pH value of the homogenate and the immunoblot profile of each type 1 sample (Fig. 1). This was also true for samples obtained from different areas of the same brain (Fig. 2). Thus, samples from the same brain may also show a certain degree of heterogeneity in brain homogenate pH as well as electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc core fragments.
View this table:    TABLE I Frontal cortex homogenate pH values in different buffer conditions (mean  plus or minus  S.D.)
We measured the actual pH values in CJD brain homogenates prepared using different homogenizing solutions (lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris (LB 100); H2O, double-distilled water corrected to pH 7.0). Homogenates in standard solutions show an acidic pH due to an insufficient buffer capacity for the strong acidic pH of the brain tissue (see pH values in H2O). Only when we used a solution with stronger buffer capacity was the pH stabilized at the desired value.
 
View larger version (71K):    FIG. 2. Regional variability in the electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 1 (MM subject); comparison between PK digestions performed at different pH values. Immunoblot analysis of homogenates from five different brain regions of a MM1 subject is shown. a, homogenates were prepared in standard lysis buffer, pH 7.4. b, homogenates were prepared in standard lysis buffer, pH 8.0. All aliquots were digested with 100  microg/ml of PK for 1 h at 37  degrees C. The actual pH values of the homogenates are shown at the bottom of each lane. Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 12% mini-gel (5.5 cm long). PUT, putamen; MFG, middle frontal gyrus; EC, entorhinal cortex; Hipp, hippocampus; AMG, amygdala. Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result (with no obvious correlation between pH and type of brain area) was reproduced with samples from five MM1 subjects.
  To analyze in detail the effect of the homogenate pH on the characteristics of PrPSc fragments generated by PK digestion, we had to stabilize the pH of the homogenate at the desired value. To this aim, we raised the buffer capacity of the lysis buffer, PBS, and citrate-phosphate buffer solutions and obtained the desired effect by increasing 10-fold either the Tris and the phosphate or citrate-phosphate salt concentration. We found that in sCJD MM1 cases the immunoblot profile of the PrPSc core fragments generated by PK digestion in standard conditions (100  microg/ml at 37  degrees C for 1 h) varied significantly according to the homogenate pH and showed a shift in gel mobility between pH 6.0 and 8.0 (Fig. 3). At a pH between 6.0 and 6.7 the protein resolved in four distinct fragments. By increasing the pH values of the homogenate we obtained a progressive disappearance of the slowest migrating peptides associated with a parallel increase in the amount of the fastest migrating fragments together with the appearance around pH 7.2 of a novel fragment that migrated even faster. Finally, an additional (6th) slower migrating fragment was detected after digestion at a very acidic pH (5.0-5.5) (Fig. 3), whereas no digestion at all was observed at pH 4.0 (data not shown). Thus, the PrPSc core heterogeneity observed in MM1 subjects using homogenates prepared in standard buffers (LB with 10 mM Tris or standard PBS, pH 7.4), as used in previous studies (9, 24, 26, 36), was clearly related to the variability of the homogenate pH (Figs. 1, 2, 3).
View larger version (64K):    FIG. 3. Effect of pH on the electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 1 (MM subject). Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from a MM1 subject is shown. Homogenates were prepared in different solutions with high buffer capacities at pH values from 5.0 to 8.0 (citrate-phosphate buffer at pH 5.0 and 5.5; PBS with a 10x increase in phosphate salt concentration plus 1% Sarkosyl at pH 6.0; lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris at pH =" BORDER="0"> 6.7). All aliquots were digested with 100  microg/ml of PK for 1 h at 37  degrees C. The actual pH values of the homogenates are shown at the bottom of each lane. Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 15% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result was reproduced at least twice with samples from 5 MM1 subjects.
  The Effect of PK Activity Given that the pH optimum for PK is in the basic pH range, we asked whether the multiple PrPSc fragments generated by protease digestion at acidic pH may be at least in part the consequence of a reduced PK activity. By exposing the samples to different PK concentrations we found that the same heterogeneity among PrPSc fragments generated by PK digestion at various pH values could be obtained by changing the PK concentration at a given pH value. In particular, we observed the appearance of the "ladder effect" on type 1 samples digested at pH 8.0 by progressively decreasing the PK concentration (Fig. 4). Similarly, a complete disappearance of the PrPSc fragments of higher molecular mass that are seen after digestion at acidic pH (6.7) was obtained by increasing the PK concentration 10-15 times (Fig. 4).
View larger version (55K):    FIG. 4. Effect of PK concentration on the electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 1 (MM subject). Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from a MM1 subject is shown. Homogenates were prepared in lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris at pH 6.7 (lane 1-5) and 8.0 (lane 6-10). Aliquots were digested at 37  degrees C for 1 h using different PK concentrations. Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 15% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result was reproduced at least twice with samples from three MM1 subjects.
  To determine whether there is also an effect of pH on PrPSc irrespective of its effect on PK activity, we used higher PK concentrations, varying them according to pH to compensate for the change in protease activity and avoid the complete PrPSc digestion. Whereas at pH values below 7.2 PK digestion of PrPSc extracted from sCJD MM1 showed a relative molecular mass of 21 kDa, at pH values higher than 7.3 the protein migrated about 1 kDa faster (Fig. 5). Both fragments were seen at pH 7.2-7.3. All MM1 (n = 40) subjects analyzed showed this shift in gel migration. The shift in electrophoretic mobility did not disappear when we prolonged the PK incubation time to the almost complete PrPSc digestion (Fig. 10 and data not shown), further suggesting a direct effect of pH on PrPSc independent from its effect on PK activity.
View larger version (45K):    FIG. 5. Effect of pH on the electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 1 (MM subject) in the presence of a high PK concentration. Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from a MM1 subject is shown. Homogenates were prepared in lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris at pH values from 6.8 to 7.6. Aliquots were digested with relatively high PK concentrations for 1 h at 37  degrees C. Because the maximum efficiency of the enzyme is at pH 8, to avoid complete digestion of PrPSc PK concentration was progressively decreased in parallel to the increase in pH values (lane 1-4, 10 mg/ml; lane 5-7, 2 mg/ml; lanes 8 and 9, 1 mg/ml). Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 15% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result was reproduced at least twice with samples from 3 MM1 subjects.
 
View larger version (56K):    FIG. 10. Analysis of protease resistance of CJD PrPSc types. Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates obtained from different phenotypic variants of CJD is shown. Samples were digested with 100  microg/ml of PK at 37  degrees C for 1 h (lanes 1 and 7 of each panel) and with different concentrations of the enzyme at 37  degrees C for 15 h (lanes 2 and 8, 100  microg/ml; lanes 3 and 9, 1,000  microg/ml; lanes 4 and 10, 3,000  microg/ml; lanes 5 and 11, 5,000  microg/ml; lanes 6 and 12, 10,000  microg/ml). Homogenates were prepared in lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris at pH 6.7 (lanes 1-6 of each panel) and 8.0 (lanes 7-12 of each panel). Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 15% gel (15 cm long). The same result was reproduced twice with samples from at least four subjects from each group.
  The Effect of Different Proteases To further verify whether the strong influence of pH on the immunoblot profile of PK-generated PrPSc fragments was mainly related to changes in PK activity rather than to pH-induced changes in PrPSc, we tested the effect of other proteases; that is, cathepsin L, whose optimum activity is at pH 5.5, and chymotrypsin, a serine protease like PK, whose optimum activity is around pH 8. We found that chymotrypsin is comparable with PK with respect to both the pattern of PrPSc fragments generated and the sensitivity to different pHs (Fig. 6), whereas cathepsin L shows a pH-related effect that is just the opposite of those of PK and chymotrypsin (Fig. 6). Indeed, the concentration of cathepsin L needed to generate a single PrPSc fragment was much higher at pH 6.8 than at pH 5.5. As with PK, however, the progressive reduction of the enzyme concentration was related to the appearance of multiple PrPSc fragments (data not shown).
View larger version (54K):    FIG. 6. Effect of pH on the digestion of PrPSc type 1 (MM subject) by cathepsin L and chymotrypsin. Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from a MM1 subject is shown. Homogenates were prepared at different pH values using different buffers (citrate phosphate pH 4.0 and pH 5.0; PBS with a 10x increase in phosphate salt concentration pH 6.5; lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris pH 6.8). Digestion was performed at 37  degrees C for 1 h with chymotrypsin (100  microg/ml) (lanes 1-4) or cathepsin L (cathepsin L, 0.15  microl/ microl) (lanes 5-7). Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 15% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result was reproduced at least twice with samples from 3 MM1 subjects.
  The Effect of EDTA According to Wadsworth et al. (26) the PK digestion of PrPSc type 1 (i.e. types 1 and 2 designations of PrPSc by Wadsworth et al. (26)) from MM subjects in the presence of 20 mM EDTA changes the pattern of cleavage and gives rise to a fragment of lower relative molecular mass. Considering our results on the effect of pH and that EDTA, according to the protocol of Wadsworth et al. (26), is prepared in a basic solution at pH 8 and then added to the homogenate, we investigated whether a change in pH rather than the EDTA itself could be responsible for the observed shift in gel mobility of PrPSc. Indeed, our results indicate that this is the case (Fig. 7). We measured the homogenate pH before and after the addition of EDTA and found that the addition of EDTA-prepared stock solution at pH 8.0 to standard PBS or LB, pH 7.4, significantly increased the pH value of the homogenate (about 0.7 pH units) (Fig. 7). Furthermore, we were not able to reproduce the effect of EDTA when the EDTA solution was adjusted to pH 7.0 before being added to the homogenate (Fig. 7). A potential influence of pH on the copper chelation activity of EDTA is unlikely, since the potential-pH diagram for the copper-EDTA system indicates that EDTA forms stable copper complexes over a wide range of pH values (37). In conclusion, our data argue that EDTA at a 20 mM concentration has no direct effect on the pattern PrPSc type 1 cleavage by PK.
View larger version (57K):    FIG. 7. Effect of EDTA on the electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 1 (MM subject). Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from a MM1 subject is shown. PK digestions were performed in PBS, pH 8.0 (lane 1), PBS, pH 7.4 (lane 2), PBS, pH 7.4, 20 mM EDTA (using a 250 mM EDTA stock solution tritiated at pH 7.0) (lane 2), PBS, pH 7.4, 20 mM EDTA (using a 250 mM EDTA stock solution tritiated at pH 8.0 (lane 3), LB, pH 7.4 (lane 4), and lysis buffer pH 8.0 (lane 5). All aliquots were digested with 150  microg/ml of PK for 1 h at 37  degrees C. The actual pH values of the homogenates are shown at the bottom of each lane. Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 12% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result was reproduced at least twice with samples from 5 MM1 subjects.
  Analysis of PrPSc Associated with sCJD Subtypes MV1, VV1, VV2, MV2, MM2-cortical, and vCJD PrPSc extracted from sCJD MV1 cases showed the same electrophoretic mobility of core fragments, including the pH-dependent shift around pH 7.2 of the type 1 from MM cases (Fig. 8 and data not shown). A shift in gel mobility that was clearly dependent on the homogenate pH and did not disappear with increasing PK concentrations was also observed in VV1 subjects. Indeed, PK digestion of VV1 samples at pH 6.9 generated a doublet of about 21 and 20 kDa even when a relatively high PK concentration was used, whereas at pH 8.0 only the fastest migrating fragment was detected (Fig. 8). Thus, the use of a 15-cm-long gel instead of the mini-gel distinguishes between PrPSc type 1 from VV subjects and PrPSc type 1 from MM or MV subjects (Fig. 8a).
View larger version (29K):    FIG. 8. Distinction of subtypes of PrPSc type 1 and type 2. Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from MM1, MV1, VV1, MM2-cortical, VV2, MV2, and vCJD subjects is shown. Homogenates were prepared in lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris at pH 6.9 (a) or pH 8.0 (b). Aliquots were digested with 2000  microg/ml of PK for 1 h at 37  degrees C. Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 15% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result was reproduced twice with samples from at least four subjects of each group.
  In contrast, PrPSc extracted from each of the sCJD subtypes associated with PrPSc type 2 (VV2, MV2, MM2-cortical) and vCJD showed much less variability in immunoblot profile. Indeed, none of the type 2 CJD subtypes showed a pH-dependent shift in PrPSc mobility that could be dissociated from PK activity. At a pH below 7.4, additional fragments migrating slower than 19 kDa were generated in all these CJD subtypes by a standard PK concentration (i.e. 100  microg/ml); however, they disappeared once the PK activity was increased either by raising the enzyme concentration or by prolonging its incubation time (Figs. 9 and 10 and data not shown). The only exception to this rule was the PrPSc type 2 from MV subjects, which resolved as a doublet of about 19 and 20 kDa even in the presence of a higher PK activity, indicating that the immunoblot profile of PrPSc from MV2 subjects is distinct from those of sCJD MM2 or VV2 as well as vCJD (Figs. 8 and 10).
View larger version (51K):    FIG. 9. Effect of different PK concentration/pH combinations on the electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 2. Immunoblot analysis of frontal cortex homogenates from an MM2-cortical subject is shown. Homogenates were prepared in lysis buffer with 100 mM Tris at pH 6.7 (lanes 1-2), 7.0 (lanes 3-5), 7.4 (lanes 6-8), and 8.0 (lanes 9-11). Aliquots were digested at 37  degrees C for 1 h using different PK concentrations. Samples were run in a Tris-glycine PAGE 15% gel (15 cm long). Approximate molecular masses are in kilodaltons. The same result was reproduced at least twice with samples from 3 MM2-cortical subjects.
  PrPSc from Various CJD Subtypes Differs in the Degree of PK Resistance The observation that the number of fragments obtained when PrPSc was digested at acidic pH (at a given PK concentration) varied significantly among samples extracted from distinct sCJD subtypes raised the possibility that distinct PrPSc types differ in the degree of protease resistance. To answer this question, we compared the effect of different PK concentrations at a given pH value. A qualitative analysis revealed that samples extracted from different CJD subtypes show varying degrees of protease resistance. In particular, PrPSc extracted from VV2 and vCJD subjects showed the highest degree of protease resistance (Fig. 10). In contrast, the type 1 PrPSc extracted from VV subjects was the most sensitive to PK digestion (Fig. 10).
The Effect of Various Detergents To evaluate the influence of detergents on PrPSc and PK activity we compared homogenizing buffers with different compositions. Sarkosyl (1%) prevented the pH-dependent shift in electrophoretic mobility seen in PrPSc MM1/MV1 (data not shown). In addition, an indirect effect on PrPSc digestion by PK was seen with Sarkosyl (1%) or sodium deoxycholate (5%) because in these conditions a higher concentration of PK was needed to obtain a complete PrPSc digestion (data not shown).
   DISCUSSION TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   The results of the present study shed light on previous disparities in PrPSc typing, provide a refined classification of human PrPSc types, and have significant implications for both the classification and the epidemiologic surveillance of TSEs in humans and animals.
We have shown that, due to the lack of sufficient buffer capacities of standard Tris or PBS buffers, there is a significant heterogeneity in pH among CJD brain homogenates even when they are prepared from the same brain. The homogenate pH in turn influences the size of the PrPSc core generated by protease digestion due to the combination of at least three factors. (i) Protease digestion of full-length PrPSc is a step-by-step process yielding fragments with various degrees of resistance, (ii) PK activity is pH-dependent, (iii) in sCJD MM1, MV1, and to a lesser extent in VV1, the size of PrPSc further changes depending on whether protease digestion is performed at a pH below or above 7.2.
Currently, there is a significant disparity in the literature regarding the existence of distinct human PrPSc types. After the original identification by Parchi et al. (24, 25) of two major PrPSc types (named type 1 and type 2) in sporadic human TSEs, two additional classifications of human PrPSc types have been proposed (26, 27). According to Wadsworth et al. (26) PrPSc type 1 from MM subjects can be distinguished into 2 subtypes based on a 0.5-kDa difference in the relative molecular mass of PrPSc. However, when pK digestion is performed in the presence of at least 20 mM EDTA, the two PrPSc subtypes show the same electrophoretic mobility, with an estimated shift of about 1.100 and 0.650 kDa for the first and second type, respectively. Zanusso et al. (27) also proposed that the Parchi et al. (24) PrPSc type 1 includes two protein subtypes having distinct conformations and strain-specific properties. However, at variance with Wadsworth et al. (26), they distinguished the two PrPSc subtypes based on their sensitivity to pH variations rather than on their presumed degree of binding to metal ions. According to the study by Zanusso et al. (27), about 60% of type 1 samples show a pH-dependent shift in electrophoretic mobility, whereas the remaining 40% appear unaffected by pH variations.
In our original descriptions of human PrPSc types (23, 24) we also noticed a certain degree of PrPSc heterogeneity among subjects belonging to the same sCJD subtype (i.e. MM1, VV2, etc.), particularly among MM1 subjects. However, at variance with the above-mentioned studies, we did not attempt to further sub-classify the human PrPSc types based on the observations that (i) the same degree of variability was also seen in samples taken from the same brain, and ii) this molecular heterogeneity did not correlate with any distinct phenotypic feature.
By demonstrating that the heterogeneity of human PrPSc type 1 within specific groups (MM or MV subjects) strictly depends on pH variations among CJD brain homogenates, the present study provides a reasonable technical explanation for the PrPSc molecular heterogeneity associated with sCJD MM1 or MV1. Thus, we believe that there is no basis at present for claiming that more than one CJD subtype or CJD strain is associated with the molecular combination codon 129 MM genotype and PrPSc type 1. Indeed, our results clearly show that, once the experimental conditions (i.e. homogenate pH, PK concentration, type of detergents) are carefully controlled, the electrophoretic mobility of PrPSc type 1 from MM subjects is highly homogenous. In this respect, it is also noteworthy that experimental transmission of prions from pure MM1 subjects to non-human primates and mice have given to date homogenous results in terms of incubation time or lesion profile (14, 16, 17). These results are in keeping with the original classification of Parchi et al. (9) and strongly suggest that only a single major agent strain is associated with the sCJD MM1 subtype.
We cannot provide a definite explanation for the finding of Zanusso et al. (27), who observed a pH-dependent shift in electrophoretic mobility in only about 60% of MM1 subjects. It is of significance, however, that they did not perform any direct measurement of actual pH in the homogenates. Thus, they may unwittingly have compared PrPSc core fragments generated at different pHs. It is also noteworthy that Wadsworth et al. (26), in perfect agreement with our results, reported a shift in electrophoretic mobility in all their sCJD MM subjects with either PrPSc type 1 or type 2 (i.e. corresponding to our type 1) when they were treated with 20 mM EDTA at pH 8 before PK digestion. However, according to our results the change in PK cleavage depends on homogenate pH variations rather than on EDTA.
Our finding of decreased pH values in brains from patients with sCJD deserves further comment. The observation raises the interesting question of whether the acidic pH is somehow related to the disease pathogenesis. Previous studies document a decline in post-mortem human brain pH values that positively correlate with age at death and agonal state severity (38, 39). Moreover, we found that in non-human primates experimentally infected with prions who did not suffer from an agonal state, the brain pH was much less acidic (data not shown). Further studies on brain metabolites in vivo, however, will be required to provide a definitive answer to this issue.
Our data also shed light on the current understanding of the molecular basis of human TSE strains and phenotypic variability. Several lines of evidence indicate that the pathological heterogeneity of human TSEs is related to the physicochemical properties of protease-resistant prion protein (24, 25). However, whether each phenotype is indeed related to a specific PrPSc tertiary or quaternary structure is still unknown. In sporadic CJD five phenotypes have been characterized, but only two major PrPSc types have been consistently reproduced based on difference in the relative molecular mass of PrPSc (9). By using gels with improved resolution and different experimental conditions, we have now shown that PrPSc type 1 in codon 129 MM or MV subjects has distinct physicochemical properties from the type 1 in the VV homozygotes. In addition, only in MM1/MV1 and VV1 samples did PrPSc show a pH-dependent shift in gel mobility. Our data also show that distinct physicochemical properties characterize the sCJD subtypes associated to PrPSc type 2. For example, PrPSc from MV subjects with kuru plaques is clearly distinguishable from the other type 2s because it uniquely resolves as a doublet, even when a relatively high pK concentration is used. Furthermore, we have shown that PrPSc from VV2 subjects as well as vCJD display a significantly higher protease resistance than the PrPSc from MM2-cortical cases. Thus, analysis of protease resistance may allow the distinction between VV2 and MM2-cortical cases without PRNP genotyping and further helps, in combination with the study of PrPSc glycoform ratio (36), to distinguish vCJD from other CJD MM2 subtypes. Taken together, these data demonstrate that there are specific PrPSc properties associated with each sCJD pathological phenotype as well as vCJD, supporting the notion that at least in human TSEs the pathological phenotype is related to differences in PrPSc molecular structure.
By improving the molecular distinction between sCJD subtypes, our data also have important implications for the future epidemiological studies into the etiology of sCJD. Indeed, the epidemiology of sCJD to date has been analyzed considering sCJD as a single entity, which might have prevented the discovery of risk factors associated with single or subgroups of sCJD subtypes. Finally, it is reasonable to believe that our study will also contribute to standardizing and harmonizing PrPSc typing among laboratories, which will represent the basis for the new epidemiologic approach. In this regard we wish to underline the protocol, which in our opinion gives the best visualization of the heterogeneity in electrophoretic mobility (typing) among human PrPSc subtypes (Fig. 8a). This includes (i) a homogenizing solution with strong buffer capacity such as our LB with 100 mM Tris, (ii) protease digestion at pH 6.9 using a relatively high PK concentration (i.e. 2 mg/ml), and (iii) the use of 15% Tris-glycine gels with a 15-cm long running gel.
   FOOTNOTES   * This work was supported by European Union Grant QLK3-CT-2001-02345, by the University of Bologna (Fondi ex. 60% 2002-2003) (to P. P.), by NIA Grant P30 AG10133, and by the Gino Galletti Foundation. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
** To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Universita di Bologna, Via Foscolo 7, 40123 Bologna, Italy. Tel.: 39-051-6442151; Fax: 39-051-6442214; E-mail: parchi{at}neuro.unibo.it" + user + "@" + domain + "" //-->.
1 The abbreviations used are: TSE, transmissible spongiform encephalopathy; PrP, prion protein; PrPc, cellular prion protein; PrPSc, scrapie/protease-resistant prion protein; PK, proteinase K; CJD, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; sCJD, sporadic CJD; vCJD, variant CJD; PRNP, prion protein gene; MM1, methionine homozygote at codon 129, PrPSc type 1; MV1, methionine/valine heterozygote at codon 129, PrPSc type 1; VV1, valine homozygote at codon 129, PrPSc type 1; MM2, methionine homozygote at codon 129, PrPSc type 2; VV2, valine homozygote at codon 129, PrPSc type 2; MV2, methionine/valine heterozygote at codon 129, PrPSc type 2; LB, lysis buffer; PBS, Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline lacking Ca2+ and Mg2+.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   Prof. James Ironside at the National CJD Surveillance Unit in the United Kingdom kindly provided the tissues of vCJD used for this study.
   REFERENCES TOP ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES RESULTS DISCUSSION REFERENCES   Parchi, P. (2000) in Neurodegenerative Dementias: Clinical Features and Pathological Mechanisms (Clark, C., and Trojanowski, J. Q., eds) pp. 341-365, McGraw-Hill Inc., New York Ghetti, B., Bugiani, O., Tagliavini, F., and Piccardo, P. (2003) in Neurodegeneration: The Molecular Pathology of Dementia and Movement Disorders (Dickson, D., ed) pp. 318-325, ISN Neuropath Press Ironside, J. W., Head, M. W., and Will, R. G. (2003) in Neurodegeneration: The Molecular Pathology of Dementia and Movement Disorders (Dickson, D., ed) pp. 310-317, ISN Neuropath Press Prusiner, S. B. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 13363-13383[Abstract/Free Full Text] Bueler, H., Aguzzi, A., Sailer, A., Greiner, R. A., Autenried, P., Aguet, M., and Weissmann, C. (1993) Cell 73, 1339-1347[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Bolton, D. C., McKinley, M. P., and Prusiner, S. B. (1982) Science 218, 1309-1311[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Pan, K. M., Baldwin, M., Nguyen, J., Gasset, M., Serban, A., Groth, D., Mehlhorn, I., Huang, Z., Fletterick, R. J., Cohen, F. E., and Prusiner, S. B. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 10962-10966[Abstract] Caughey, B. W., Dong, A., Bhat, K. S., Ernst, D., Hayes, S. F., and Caughey, W. S. (1991) Biochemistry 30, 7672-7680[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Parchi, P., Giese, A., Capellari, S. Brown, P., Schulz-Schaeffer, W., Windl, O., Zerr, I., Budka, H., Kopp, N., Piccardo, P., Poser, S., Rojiani, A., Streichemberger, N., Julien, J., Vital, C., Ghetti, B., Gambetti, P., and Kretzschmar, H. (1999) Ann. Neurol. 46, 224-2333.0.CO;2-W  Sons, Inc., New York Kascsak, R. J., Rubenstein, R., Merz, P. A., Carp, R. I., Robakis, N. K., Wisniewski, H. M., and Diringer, H. (1986) J. Virol. 59, 676-683[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Bessen, R. A., and Marsh, R. F. (1994) J. Virol. 68, 7859-7868[Abstract] Safar, J., Wille, H., Itri, V., Groth, D., Serban, H., Torchia, M., Cohen, F. E., and Prusiner, S. B. (1998) Nat. Med. 4, 1157-1165[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Caughey, B., Raymond, G. J., and Bessen, R. A. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 32230-32235[Abstract/Free Full Text] Somerville, R. A., Chong, A., Mulqueen, O. U., Birkett, C. R., Wood, S. C., and Hope, J. (1997) Nature 386, 564[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Parchi, P., Capellari, S., Chen, S. G., Petersen, R. B., Gambetti, P., Kopp, N., Brown, P., Kitamoto, T., Tateishi, J., Giese, A., and Kretzschmar, H. (1997) Nature 386, 232-233[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Parchi, P., Castellani, R., Capellari, S., Ghetti, B., Young, K., Chen, S. G., Farlow, M., Dickson, D. W., Sima, A. A. F., Trojanowski, J. Q., Petersen, R. B., and Gambetti, P. (1996) Ann. Neurol. 39, 767-778[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Parchi, P., Zou, W., Wang, W., Brown, P., Capellari, S., Ghetti, B., Kopp, N., Schulz-Schaeffer, W. J., Kretzschmar, H. A., Head, M. W., Ironside, J. W., Gambetti, P., and Chen, S. G. (2000) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 10168-10172[Abstract/Free Full Text] Wadsworth, J. D. F., Hill, A. F., Joiner, S., Jackson, G. S., Clarke, A. R., and Collinge, J. (1999) Nat. Cell Biol. 1, 55-59[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Zanusso, G., Farinazzo, A., Fiorini, M., Gelati, M., Castagna, A., Righetti, P. G., Rizzuto, N., and Monaco, S. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 40377-40380[Abstract/Free Full Text] Hope, J., Wood, S. C., Birkett, C. R., Chong, A., Bruce, M. E., Cairns, D., Goldmann, W., Hunter, N., and Bostock, C. J. (1999) J. Gen. Virol. 80, 1-4[Abstract] Baron, T. G., Madec, J. Y., Calavas, D., Richard, Y., and Barillet, F. (2000) Neurosci. Lett. 284, 175-178[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Kuczius, T., and Groschup, M. H. (1999) Mol. Med. 5, 406-418[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Miura, T., Hori-i, A., Mototani, H., and Takeuchi, H. (1999) Biochemistry 38, 11560-11569[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Kramer, M. L., Kratzin, H. D., Schmidt, B., Romer, A., Windl, O., Liemann, S., Hornemann, S., and Kretzschmar, H. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 16711-16719[Abstract/Free Full Text] Ebeling, W., Hennrich, N., Klockow, M., Metz, H., Orth, H. D., and Lang, H. (1974) Eur. J. Biochem. 47, 91-97[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Naureckiene, S., Ma, L., Sreekumar, K., Purandare, U., Lo, C. F., Huang, Y., Chiang, L. W., Grenier, J. M., Ozenberger, B. A., Jacobsen, J. S., Kennedy, J. D., DiStefano, P. S., Wood, A., and Bingham, B. (2003) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 420, 55-67[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Kascsak, R. J., Rubenstein, R., Merz, P. A., Tonna-DeMasi, M., Fersko, R., Carp, R. I., Wisniewski, H. M., and Diringer, H. (1987) J. Virol. 61, 3688-3693[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Collinge, J., Sidle, K. C. L., Meads, J., Ironside, J., and Hill, A. F. (1996) Nature 383, 685-690[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Aksu, S., and Doyle, F. M. (2000) in Electrochemistry in Mineral and Metal Processing V (Woods, R., and Doyle, F. M., eds) pp. 258-269, The Electro-chemical Society, Pennington, NJ Yates, C. M., Butterworth, J., Tennant, M. C., and Gordon, A. (1990) J. Neurochem. 55, 1624-1630[Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve] Harrison, P. J., Heath, P. R., Eastwood, S. L., Burnet, P. W. J., McDonald, B., and Pearson, R. C. A. (1995) Neurosci. Lett. 200, 151-154[CrossRef][Medline] [Order article via Infotrieve]
