Teenage kicks D. J. Kerr
Editor-in-Chief, University of Oxford, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Oxford, UK
Can you recollect your teenage years? Disraeli said that "The blunders of youth are preferable to the triumphs of manhood or the success of old age", and perhaps he was right; that unconquerable sense of optimism, that seeming immortality, that sometime faltering sense of self.
 Annals of Oncology is 15 years old this year. This may seem a minor achievement when compared with the 340 years of Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, but I know it is a cause of some satisfaction, if not some surprise, to those present at its birth. We need not speak overmuch of the conception, which legend has it occurred in a bar; I wasn't there. Credit is due to Franco Cavalli and those who worked with him to make that barroom banter into a reality and in the space of 10 years made Annals what it is one of the world's leading clinical oncology journals.
It may be worthwhile to remind ourselves how recent 1990 is and how far Annals has come in those 15 years. 1990 began with George Bush Sr in the White House, Margaret Thatcher in 10 Downing Street and Nelson Mandela in prison. In Berlin, the Wall began to be taken down and thousands stormed the Stasi's HQ. In Britain, thousands rioted against the poll tax, and a government minister fed his daughter a beefburger on television to counter rumours of mad cow disease. In August Iraq invaded Kuwait, precipitating the Gulf War. In November a computer scientist working at the CERN laboratory in Geneva published a paper describing something he called the World Wide Web.
The contribution of Annals of Oncology to these world events was exactly nil. To suggest otherwise would be hubristic nonsense. But within clinical oncology Annals has made, and is making, a difference. Let me give you some numbers: in 1990 Annals of Oncology received 252 manuscripts; last year that figure was nearly 1000. In 1990 Annals published barely 450 pages; last year that figure was over 1800. In the last 5 years alone the impact factor of the journal has gone up some 26%, with last year's increase, to 3.605, the biggest single-year increase on record. Subscriptions to the journal have grown dramatically, paralleling the growth of ESMO, and with the advent of the online journal (http://annonc.oupjournals.org) institutional access to the journal has increased from a few hundred paper subscribers to several thousand online. Last year the Annals web site served over 700 000 full text articles to readers all over the world, including those in not-for-profit institutions in over 120 developing or middle-income countries, who are now able to apply for free or receive greatly discounted online access to the journal through initiatives operated by Oxford University Press (OUP), the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the International Network for the Availability of Scientific Publications.
This year Annals, with the full support of both ESMO and OUP, will move to a copyright licence system that will allow authors to retain copyright of their published articles. All concerned agree that this is fair and right, and it will, I believe make a further contribution to expanding access to Annals. In parallel with this development we will be making changes to the journal's website. Operation of the website will remain in the inestimable hands of Stanford University's HighWire Press, but we again hope to tweak things to improve the experience and expand access. Significant among these tweaks will be the move to advance access publication, or publication ahead of print (charmingly shorthanded to PAP by the cognoscenti). This will involve an accepted article being published on the journal's website as soon as a finalised, corrected proof becomes available, irrespective of the paper issue to which it has been assigned. In this way we hope to be able to bring important articles to Annals readers some 4 to 8 weeks ahead of print publication (see http://annonc.oupjournals.org/papbyrecent.dtl).
I hope it is clear from all this that I place the support of authors, editors and referees at the heart of the Journal. Last year we again awarded the Annals of Oncology prizes [1] and, as predicted [2], it proved to be a worthwhile experience, thanks to the support of authors who chose Annals as the place they wanted to publish their research. The breadth and diversity of the science submitted to Annals never ceases to astonish me, from significant phase III randomised trials [3, 4] to early clinical [5] and preclinical [6] studies, from analyses of websites for complementary medicine [7] to important epidemiologic analyses [8]. Similarly, I am able to look at the many invited editorials (e.g. [9, 10]) and reviews (e.g. [11, 12]) that have recently been published in Annals with considerable satisfaction.
So there you have it: Annals of Oncology big hearted, clever and still trying hard to fulfill its potential at 15 years old. And hopefully, still with enough honesty and humility to recognize it is in no small part the work of others that has made it what it is.
E Tenebris Lux
References
1. Kerr DJ. A word in your ear: the Annals of Oncology prizes. Ann Oncol 2004; 1303 to 1304.
2. Kerr D. A little citadel of light in a malignant sea of darkness. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1 to 2.[Free Full Text]
3. Fleming GF, Filiaci VL, Bentley RC et al. Phase III randomized trial of doxorubicin cisplatin versus doxorubicin +24-h paclitaxel + filgrastim in endometrial carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1173 to 1178.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
4. Abratt RP, Brune D, Dimopoulos M-A et al. Randomised phase III study of intravenous vinorelbine plus hormone therapy versus hormone therapy alone in hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1613 to 1621.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
5. Marshall J, Chen H, Yang D et al. A phase I trial of a Bcl-2 antisense (G3139) and weekly docetaxel in patients with advanced breast cancer and other solid tumors. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1274 to 1283.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
6. Rozados VR, Sanchez AM, Gervasoni SI et al. Metronomic therapy with cyclophosphamide induces rat lymphoma and sarcoma regression, and is devoid of toxicity. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1543 to 1550.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
7. Schmidt K, Ernst E. Assessing websites on complementary and alternative medicine for cancer. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 733 to 742.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
8. Levi F, Lucchini F, Negri E et al. Trends in cancer mortality in the European Union and accession countries, 1980 to 2000. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1425 to 1431.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
9. Andre F, le Chevalier T, Soria JC. Her2-neu: a target in lung cancer? Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 3 to 4.[Free Full Text]
10. Dignam JJ, Mamounas EP. Obesity and breast cancer prognosis: an expanding body of evidence. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 850 to 851.[Free Full Text]
11. Vardy J, Tannock IF. Quality of cancer care. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1001 to 1006.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
12. Mano MS, Awada A. Primary chemotherapy for breast cancer: the evidence and the future. Ann Oncol 2004; 15: 1161 to 1171.[Abstract/Free Full Text]
This Article Full Text (PDF) E-letters: Submit a response Alert me when this article is cited Alert me when E-letters are posted Alert me if a correction is posted Services Email this article to a friend Similar articles in this journal Similar articles in ISI Web of Science Similar articles in PubMed Alert me to new issues of the journal Add to My Personal Archive Download to citation manager Disclaimer Request Permissions Google Scholar Articles by Kerr, D. J. PubMed PubMed Citation Articles by Kerr, D. J. Online ISSN 1569-8041 - Print ISSN 0923-7534 Copyright   2006 European Society for Medical Oncology Oxford Journals Oxford University Press Site Map Terms  and  Conditions --> Privacy Policy Frequently Asked Questions Other Oxford University Press sites: Oxford University Press American National Biography Booksellers' Information Service Children's Fiction and Poetry Children's Reference Corporate  and  Special Sales Dictionaries Dictionary of National Biography Digital Reference English Language Teaching Higher Education Textbooks Humanities International Education Unit Law Medicine Music Online Products Oxford English Dictionary Reference Rights and Permissions Science School Books Social Sciences Very Short Introductions World's Classics
