The Mad Cow Talks Back Jo Shapcott
I'm not mad. It just seems that way because I stagger and get a bit irritable. There are wonderful holes in my brain through which ideas from outside can travel at top speed and through which voices, sometimes whole people, speak to me about the universe. Most brains are too compressed. You need this spongy generosity to let the others in.
I love the staggers. Suddenly the surface of the world is ice and I'm a magnificent skater turning and spinning across whole hard Pacifics and Atlantics. It's risky when you're good, so of course the legs go before, behind, and to the side of the body from time to time, and then there's the general embarrassing collapse, but when that happens it's glorious because it's always when you're travelling most furiously in your mind. My brain's like the hive: constant little murmurs from its cells saying this is the way, this is the way to go.
Originally published in: Her Book by Jo Shapcott, Faber and Faber Ltd. Reprinted with permission.
This Article Extract FREE Full Text (PDF) Alert me when this article is cited Alert me if a correction is posted Services Email this article to a friend Similar articles in this journal Similar articles in PubMed Alert me to new issues of the journal Add to My Personal Archive Download to citation manager Request Permissions Google Scholar Articles by Shapcott, J. PubMed PubMed Citation Articles by Shapcott, J. Online ISSN 1464-3685 - Print ISSN 0300-5771 Copyright   2006 International Epidemiological Association Oxford Journals Oxford University Press Site Map Terms  and  Conditions --> Privacy Policy Frequently Asked Questions Other Oxford University Press sites: Oxford University Press American National Biography Booksellers' Information Service Children's Fiction and Poetry Children's Reference Corporate  and  Special Sales Dictionaries Dictionary of National Biography Digital Reference English Language Teaching Higher Education Textbooks Humanities International Education Unit Law Medicine Music Online Products Oxford English Dictionary Reference Rights and Permissions Science School Books Social Sciences Very Short Introductions World's Classics
